# Diseases

---------------------PROCTOLOGY-----------------------------------
-----------------------PILES-----------------
<p><strong>Summary:-&nbsp;</strong></p><p>PILES also called Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in your anus and lower rectum, similar to varicose veins. PILES are usually caused by straining during bowel movements. Nearly three out of four adults will have hemorrhoids from time to time. It has a number of causes, but often the cause is unknown. It can develop inside the rectum (internal hemorrhoids) or under the skin around the anus (external hemorrhoids) and Thrombosed hemorrhoids. Piles, arise from a cushion of dilated arteriovenous blood vessels and connective tissue in the anal canal that may abnormally enlarge or protrude. Hemorrhoids are divided into three categories: internal ,external or mixed. PILES are caused by increased straining or intra-abdominal pressure (e.g., due to constipation, pregnancy, or extended periods of sitting). Patients may present with prolapse, rectal bleeding, pain, and pruritus.</p><p>CAUSES:-</p><p>The veins around your anus tend to stretch under pressure and may bulge or swell. Hemorrhoids can develop from increased pressure in the lower rectum due to:</p><ul><li>Straining during bowel movements</li><li>Sitting for long periods of time on the toilet</li><li>Having chronic diarrhea or constipation</li><li>Being obese</li><li>Being pregnant</li><li>Having anal intercourse</li><li>Eating a low-fiber diet</li><li>Regular heavy lifting</li></ul>

<p>Symptoms :-</p><p>Signs and symptoms of Piles usually depend on the type of Piles.</p><p><strong>External hemorrhoids:-</strong></p><p>These are under the skin around your anus. Signs and symptoms might include:</p><ul><li>Itching or irritation in your anal region</li><li>Pain or discomfort</li><li>Swelling around your anus</li><li>Bleeding</li></ul><p><strong>Internal hemorrhoids :-</strong></p><p>Internal hemorrhoids lie inside the rectum. You usually can't see or feel them, and they rarely cause discomfort. But straining or irritation when passing stool can cause:</p><ul><li>Painless bleeding during bowel movements. You might notice small amounts of bright red blood on your toilet tissue or in the toilet.</li><li>A hemorrhoid to push through the anal opening (prolapsed or protruding hemorrhoid), resulting in pain and irritation.</li></ul><p><strong>Thrombosed hemorrhoids :-</strong></p><p>If blood pools in an external hemorrhoid and forms a clot (thrombus), it can result in:</p><ul><li>Severe pain</li><li>Swelling</li><li>Inflammation</li><li>A hard lump near your anus</li></ul>

<p>TREATMENT:-</p><p><strong>Diet</strong>: Piles can occur due to straining during bowel movements. Excessive straining is the result of constipation. A change in diet can help keep the stools regular and soft. This involves eating more fiber, such as fruit and vegetables, or primarily eating bran-based breakfast cereals.A doctor may also advise the person with piles to increase their water consumption. It is best to avoid caffeine.</p><p><strong>Body weight</strong>: Losing weight may help reduce the incidence and severity of piles.To prevent piles, doctors also advise exercising and avoiding straining to pass stools. Exercising is one of the main therapies for piles.</p><h3><strong>Medications</strong></h3><p>Several medicinal options are available to make symptoms more manageable for an individual with piles.</p><p><strong>Over-the-counter (OTC) medications:</strong> Medications include painkillers, ointments, creams, and pads, and can help soothe redness and swelling around the anus.OTC remedies do not cure piles but can help the symptoms. Do not use them for more than 7 days in a row, as they can cause further irritation of the area and thinning of the skin. Do not use two or more medications at the same time unless advised to by a medical professional.</p><p><strong>Corticosteroids</strong>: These can reduce inflammation and pain.</p><p><strong>Laxatives</strong>: The doctor may prescribe laxatives if a person with piles suffers from constipation. These can help the person pass stools more easily and reduce pressure on the lower colon.</p><h3><strong>Surgical options</strong></h3><p>Around 1 in 10 people with piles will end up needing surgery.</p><p><strong>Banding</strong>: The doctor places an elastic band around the base of the pile, cutting off its blood supply. After a few days, hemorrhoid falls off. This is effective for treating all hemorrhoids of less than grade IV status.</p><p><strong>Sclerotherapy</strong>: Medicine is injected to make the hemorrhoid shrink. Hemorrhoid eventually shrivels up. This is effective for grade II and III hemorrhoids and is an alternative to banding.</p><p><strong>Infrared coagulation</strong>: Also referred to as infrared light coagulation, a device is used to burn the hemorrhoid tissue. This technique is used to treat grade I and II hemorrhoids.</p><p><strong>Hemorrhoidectomy</strong>: The excess tissue that is causing the bleeding is surgically removed. This can be done in various ways and may involve a combination of a local anesthetic and sedation, a spinal anesthetic, or a general anesthetic. This type of surgery is the most effective for completely removing piles, but there is a risk of complications, including difficulties with passing stools, as well as urinary tract infections.</p><p><strong>Hemorrhoid stapling</strong>: Blood flow is blocked to the hemorrhoid tissue. This procedure is usually less painful than hemorrhoidectomy. However, this procedure can lead to an increased risk of hemorrhoid recurrence and rectal prolapse, in which part of the rectum pushes out of the anus.</p>

-----------------------CONSTIPATION----------------

<p><strong>SUMMARY:-</strong></p><p>Chronic constipation is infrequent bowel movements or difficult passage of stools that persists for several weeks or longer. It is generally described as having fewer than three bowel movements a week. Constipation occurs when a person has difficulty emptying the large bowel. It&rsquo;s defined as having hard, dry bowel movements or going fewer than three times a week. Though occasional constipation is very common, some people experience chronic constipation that can interfere with their ability to go about their daily tasks. Chronic constipation may also cause people to strain excessively in order to have a bowel movement.</p><p><strong>CAUSES:-</strong></p><ul><li>Eating foods low in fiber.</li></ul><p>Low fiber foods include:</p><p>- high-fat foods, such as cheese, meat, and eggs</p><p>- highly processed foods, such as white bread</p><p>- fast foods, chips, and other premade foods</p><ul><li>Not drinking enough water (dehydration).</li><li>Not getting enough exercise.</li><li>Changes in your regular routine, such as traveling or eating or going to bed at different times.</li><li>Eating large amounts of milk or cheese.</li><li>Stress.</li><li>Resisting the urge to have a bowel movement</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:-</strong></p><ul><li>Passing fewer than three stools a week</li><li>Having lumpy or hard stools</li><li>Straining to have bowel movements</li><li>Feeling as though there's a blockage in your rectum that prevents bowel movements</li><li>Feeling as though you can't completely empty the stool from your rectum</li><li>Needing help to empty your rectum, such as using your hands to press on your abdomen and using a finger to remove stool from your rectum</li></ul><ul><li>Pain and cramping in the abdomen</li><li>Feeling bloated</li><li>Nausea</li><li>Loss of appetite</li></ul>

<p><strong>TREATMENT:-</strong></p><ul><li>Include plenty of high-fiber foods in your diet, including beans, vegetables, fruits, whole grain cereals, and bran.</li><li>Eat fewer foods with low amounts of fiber such as processed foods, and dairy and meat products.</li><li>Drink plenty of fluids.</li><li>Stay as active as possible and try to get regular exercise.</li><li>Try to manage stress.</li><li>Don't ignore the urge to pass stool.</li><li>Try to create a regular schedule for bowel movements, especially after a meal.</li><li>Make sure children who begin to eat solid foods get plenty of fiber in their diets.</li></ul><p>Laxatives can improve symptoms in the short-term, but people should use them with care and only when necessary because some laxatives can have severe adverse effects.</p><p><strong>Fiber supplements</strong>: Also known as bulk-forming laxatives, these may be the safest option. FiberCon is one example. People should take these with plenty of water.</p><p><strong>Stimulants</strong>: These cause the muscles in the intestines to contract rhythmically. Senokot is one example.</p><p><strong>Lubricants</strong>: These help the stool move smoothly through the colon. One example is mineral oil (Fleet).</p><p><strong>Stool softeners</strong>: These moisten the stool. Examples include Colace and Surfak.</p><p><strong>Osmotics</strong>: These draw water into the colon to hydrate the stool and ease movement. Saline laxatives are a type of osmotic.</p><p><strong>Neuromuscular agents</strong>: These include opioid antagonists and 5-HT4 agonists. They work at specific receptors to regulate movement through the gut</p><p>If constipation does not respond to treatment or if there are other symptoms, an abdominal imaging study such as a CT scan, MRI scan, or X-ray to see if there is a blockage due to an underlying disease process in the gut.</p>


-----------------------FISTULA---------------------------------------

<p>SUMMARY:-</p><p>A <strong>fistula</strong> is an abnormal connection between two hollow spaces such as blood vessels, intestines, or other hollow organs. Fistulas are usually caused by injury or surgery, but they can also result from an infection or inflammation. Fistulas are generally a disease condition, but they may be surgically created for therapeutic reasons. A fistula is a tunnel that runs from inside the anus the hole your body uses to get rid of solid waste to somewhere in the skin around it. It usually follows an infection that didn&rsquo;t heal the right way. Fistulas form when inflammation causes sores or <strong>ulcers </strong>to form on the inside wall of the intestine or nearby organs. These ulcers can extend through the entire thickness of the bowel wall, creating a tunnel to drain the pus from the infected area. An abscess, or a collection of pus, can also cause a fistula to form.</p><p><strong>CAUSES:-</strong></p><p>&nbsp;Inside your anus are several glands that make fluid. Sometimes they get blocked or clogged. When that happens a bacteria buildup can create a swollen pocket of infected tissue and liquid. Doctors call this an abscess. If you don&rsquo;t treat the abscess it&rsquo;ll grow. Eventually, it&rsquo;ll make its way to the outside and punch a hole in the skin somewhere near your anus so the gunk inside it can drain. The fistula is the tunnel that connects the gland to that opening. Most of the time an abscess causes a fistula. It&rsquo;s rare but they can also come from conditions like sexually transmitted diseases or an ongoing illness that affects your bowels.</p><p>other causes are -</p><ul><li>Chrons disease (an inflammatory disease of the intestine)</li><li>Radiation (treatment for cancer)</li><li>Trauma.</li><li>Sexually transmitted diseases.</li><li>Tuberculosis.</li><li>Diverticulitis (a disease in which small pouches form in the large intestine and become inflamed)</li></ul>

<p><strong>SYMPTOMS:-</strong></p><p>Patients can have different symptoms depending on which parts of the body are connected by the fistula.</p><p><strong>Fistula between the small and large intestine</strong></p><ul><li>Diarrhea</li><li>Passage of undigested food</li></ul><p><strong>Fistula between the intestine and the bladder</strong></p><ul><li>Urinary tract infection</li><li>Burning with urination</li><li>Cloudy urine or blood in the urine</li></ul><p><strong>Fistula between the intestine and the vagina</strong></p><ul><li>Passage of gas or stool through the vagina</li></ul><p><strong>Fistula from the intestine to the skin</strong></p><ul><li>Can initially present as a painful bump or boil</li><li>Skin abscess that is open and draining fluid or stool</li></ul><p>You can also notice</p><ul><li>Pain</li><li>Redness</li><li>Swelling around your anus</li><li>Bleeding</li><li>Painful bowel movements or urination</li><li>Fever</li><li>A foul-smelling liquid oozing from a hole near your anus</li></ul>

<p><strong>Treatment:-</strong></p><p><strong>Surgery is usually necessary to treat an anal fistula as they usually do not heal by themselves.</strong></p><p><strong>Sometimes you may need to have an initial examination of area under general anaesthetic to determine best treatment</strong></p><h2><strong>Types of surgery:-</strong></h2><h2><strong>Fistulotomy -</strong></h2><ul><li>The most common type of surgery for anal fistulas is a fistulotomy. This involves cutting along the whole length of the fistula to open it up so it heals as a flat scar.</li><li>A fistulotomy is the most effective treatment for many anal fistulas, although it's usually only suitable for fistulas that do not pass through much of the sphincter muscles, as the risk of incontinence is lowest in these cases.</li><li>If the surgeon has to cut a small portion of anal sphincter muscle during the procedure, they'll make every attempt to reduce the risk of incontinence.</li><li>In cases where the risk of incontinence is considered too high, another procedure may be recommended instead.</li></ul><h2><strong>Seton techniques -</strong></h2><ul><li>If your fistula passes through a significant portion of the anal sphincter muscle, the surgeon may initially recommend inserting a seton.</li><li>A seton is a piece of surgical thread that's left in the fistula for several weeks to keep it open.</li><li>This allows it to drain and helps it heal while avoiding the need to cut the sphincter muscles.</li><li>Loose setons allow fistulas to drain but do not cure them. To cure a fistula, tighter setons may be used to cut through the fistula slowly.</li></ul><h2><strong>Advancement flap procedure -</strong></h2><ul><li>An advancement flap procedure may be considered if your fistula passes through the anal sphincter muscles and having a fistulotomy carries a high risk of causing incontinence.</li><li>This involves cutting or scraping out the fistula and covering the hole where it entered the bowel with a flap of tissue taken from inside the rectum, which is the final part of the bowel.</li><li>This has a lower success rate than a fistulotomy, but avoids the need to cut the anal sphincter muscles.</li></ul><h2><strong>LIFT procedure -</strong></h2><ul><li>The ligation of the intersphincteric fistula tract (LIFT) procedure is a treatment for fistulas that pass through the anal sphincter muscles, where a fistulotomy would be too risky.</li><li>During the treatment, a cut is made in the skin above the fistula and the sphincter muscles are moved apart. The fistula is then sealed at both ends and cut open so it lies flat.</li><li>This procedure has had some promising results so far, but it's only been around for a few years, so more research is needed to determine how well it works in the short and long term.</li></ul><h2><strong>Endoscopic ablation-</strong></h2><ul><li>In this procedure, an endoscope (a tube with a camera on the end) is put in the fistula.</li><li>An electrode is then passed through the endoscope and used to seal the fistula.</li><li>Endoscopic ablation works well and there are no serious concerns about its safety.</li></ul><h2><strong>Laser surgery</strong></h2><ul><li>Radially emitting laser fibre treatment involves using a small laser beam to seal the fistula.</li><li>There are uncertainties around how well it works, but there are no major safety concerns.</li></ul>

--------FISSURE-------

<p><strong>SUMMARY:-</strong></p><p>An anal fissure is a small tear in the thin, moist tissue (mucosa) that lines the anus. An anal fissure may occur when you pass hard or large stools during a bowel movement. Anal fissures typically cause pain and bleeding with bowel movements. You also may experience spasms in the ring of muscle at the end of your anus (anal sphincter). Anal fissures are very common in young infants but can affect people of any age.&nbsp;The crack in the skin causes severe pain and some bright red bleeding during and after bowel movements. At times the fissure can be deep enough to expose the muscle tissue underneath. An anal fissure usually isn&rsquo;t a serious condition. It can affect people of all ages and it&rsquo;s often seen in infants and young children since constipation is a common problem in these age groups.</p><p>In most cases, the tear heals on its own within four to six weeks. In cases where the fissure persists beyond eight weeks, it&rsquo;s considered chronic. Certain treatments can promote healing and help relieve discomfort, including stool softeners and topical pain relievers. If an anal fissure doesn&rsquo;t improve with these treatments you may need surgery..</p><p><strong>CAUSES:</strong></p><p>&nbsp;Anal fissure most often occurs when passing large or hard stools. Chronic constipation or frequent diarrhea can also tear the skin around your anus. Other common causes include:</p><ul><li>straining during childbirth or bowel movements</li><li>inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) such as Crohn's&nbsp;disease</li><li>decreased blood flow to the anorectal area</li><li>overly tight or spastic anal sphincter muscles</li><li>Passing large or hard stools</li><li>Constipation and straining during bowel movements</li></ul><ul><li>constipation.:- Straining during bowel movements and passing hard stools increase the risk of tearing.</li><li>Childbirth:- Anal fissures are more common in women after they give birth.</li><li>Crohn's disease:- This inflammatory bowel disease causes chronic inflammation of the intestinal tract, which may make the lining of the anal canal more vulnerable to tearing.</li><li>Anal intercourse.</li><li>Age. Anal fissures can occur at any age but are more common in infants and middle-aged adults</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:-</strong></p><ul><li>Pain, sometimes severe during bowel movements</li><li>Pain after bowel movements that can last up to several hours</li><li>Bright red blood on the stool or toilet paper after a bowel movement</li><li>Visible crack in the skin around the anus</li><li>&nbsp;Small lump or skin tag on the skin near the anal fissure</li><li>Visible tear in the skin around your anus</li><li>&nbsp;Sharp pain in the anal area during bowel movements</li><li>Streaks of blood on stools or toilet paper after wiping</li><li>Burning or itching in the anal area</li></ul>

<p><strong>TREATMENT:-</strong></p><p><strong>You can treat an anal fissure at home by:</strong></p><ul><li>Using over the counter stool softeners.</li><li>Drinking more fluids.</li><li>Taking fiber supplements and eating more fibrous foods such as raw fruits and vegetables.</li><li>Taking a sitz bath to relax the anal muscles, relieve irritation, and increase blood flow to the anorectal area.</li><li>Applying a nitroglycerin ointment to promote blood flow to the area or&nbsp;hydrocortisone cream, such as Cortizone 10 to help with inflammation.</li><li>Applying topical pain relievers, such as lidocaine, to the anus to ease discomfort.</li></ul><ul><li>A calcium channel blocker ointment can relax the sphincter muscles and allow the anal fissure to heal.</li><li>Botox injections into the anal sphincter. The injections will prevent spasms in your anus by temporarily paralyzing the muscle. This allows the anal fissure to heal while preventing new fissures from forming.</li><li>Anal sphincterotomy:- This surgical procedure involves making a small incision in the anal sphincter to relax the muscle. Relaxing the muscle allows the anal fissure to heal.</li></ul><p><strong>PREVENTIVE MEASURES:--</strong></p><ul><li>Keeping the anal area dry.</li><li>Cleansing the anal area gently with mild soap and warm water</li><li>Drinking plenty of fluids, eating fibrous foods, and exercising regularly to avoid constipation.</li><li>Treating diarrhea immediately.</li><li>Changing an infant's diapers frequently.</li></ul>



---------------------HERNIA------------------
<p><strong>SUMMARY:-</strong></p><p>A hernia occurs when an internal organ or other body part protrudes through the wall of muscle or tissue that normally contains it. Most hernias occur within the abdominal cavity, between the chest and the hips.</p><p>The most common forms of hernia are:</p><p><strong>Inguinal hernia</strong>:</p><ul><li>&nbsp;In men, the inguinal canal is a passageway for the spermatic cord and blood vessels leading to the testicles.</li><li>&nbsp;In women, the inguinal canal contains the round ligament that gives support for the womb. In an inguinal hernia, fatty tissue or a part of the intestine pokes into the groin at the top of the inner thigh.</li><li>This is the most common type of hernia and affects men more often than women.</li></ul><p><strong>Femoral hernia</strong>:</p><ul><li>Fatty tissue or part of the intestine protrudes into the groin at the top of the inner thigh.</li><li>Femoral hernias are much less common than inguinal hernias and mainly affect older women.</li></ul><p><strong>Umbilical hernia</strong>:</p><p>Fatty tissue or part of the intestine pushes through the abdomen near the navel (belly button).</p><ul><li><strong>Hiatal (hiatus) hernia</strong>: Part of the stomach pushes up into the chest cavity through an opening in the diaphragm (the horizontal sheet of muscle that separates the chest from the abdomen).</li></ul><p>Other types of hernias include:</p><ul><li><strong>Incisional hernia</strong>: Tissue protrudes through the site of an abdominal scar from a remote abdominal or pelvic operation.</li><li><strong>Epigastric hernia</strong>: Fatty tissue protrudes through the abdominal area between the navel and lower part of the sternum (breastbone).</li><li><strong>Spigelian hernia</strong>: The intestine pushes through the abdomen at the side of the abdominal muscle, below the navel.</li><li><strong>Diaphragmatic hernia</strong>: Organs in the abdomen move into the chest through an opening in the diaphragm.</li></ul><p>Of all hernias that occur:</p><ul><li>75&ndash;80% are inguinal or femoral</li><li>2% are incisional or ventral</li><li>3&ndash;10% are umbilical, affecting 10-20% of newborns;</li><li>1&ndash;3% are other types</li></ul><p><strong>CAUSES:-</strong></p><ul><li>Straining on the toilet (due to long-term constipation )</li><li>Persistent cough</li><li>Cystic fibrosis</li><li>Enlarged prostate</li><li>Straining to urinate</li><li>Being overweight or obese</li><li>Abdominal fluid</li><li>Lifting heavy items</li><li>Peritoneal dialysis</li><li>Poor nutrition</li><li>Smoking</li><li>Physical exertion</li><li>Undescended testicles</li><li>Lifting heavy objects without stabilizing the abdominal muscles</li><li>Diarrhea or constipation</li><li>Persistent coughing or sneezing</li><li>Inguinal and femoral hernias are due to weakened muscles that may have been present since birth, or are associated with aging and repeated strains on the abdominal and groin areas.</li><li>Such strain may come from physical exertion, obesity, pregnancy, frequent coughing, or straining on the toilet due to constipation.</li><li>Adults may get an umbilical hernia by straining the abdominal area, being overweight, having a long-lasting heavy cough or after giving birth.</li><li>The cause of Hiatal hernias is not fully understood, but a weakening of the diaphragm with age or pressure on the abdomen could play a part.&nbsp;</li></ul>

<p><strong>SYMPTOMS:-</strong></p><ul><li>A hernia in the abdomen or groin can produce a noticeable lump or bulge that can be pushed back in, or that can disappear when lying down.</li><li>Laughing, crying, coughing, straining during a bowel movement, or physical activity may make the lump reappear after it has been pushed in.</li><li>In the case of Hiatal hernias, there are no bulges on the outside of the body.</li><li>Instead, symptoms may include heartburn, indigestion, difficulty swallowing, frequent regurgitation (bringing food back up) and chest pain.</li></ul><p>More symptoms of a hernia include:</p><ul><li>Swelling or bulge in the groin or scrotum (the pouch that contains the testicles)</li><li>Increased pain at the site of the bulge</li><li>Pain while lifting</li><li>Increase in the bulge size over time</li><li>A dull aching sensation</li><li>A sense of feeling full or signs of bowel obstruction</li></ul>

<p><strong>TREATMENT:-</strong></p><p>Hernias usually do not get better on their own and surgery may be the only way to repair them.</p><p>&nbsp;In the case of an umbilical hernia in a child, surgery may be recommended if the hernia is large or if it has not healed by the age of 4&ndash;5 years old. By this age, a child can usually avoid surgical complications.</p><p>If an adult has an umbilical hernia, surgery is usually recommended because the condition will not likely improve on its own and the risk of complications is higher.</p><p>One of three types of hernia surgery can be performed:</p><ul><li><strong>Open surgery</strong>, in which a cut is made into the body at the location of the hernia. The protruding tissue is set back in place and the weakened muscle wall is stitched back together. Sometimes a type of mesh is implanted in the area to provide extra support.</li><li><strong>Laparoscopic surgery</strong> involves the same type of repairs. However, instead of a cut to the outside of the abdomen or groin, tiny incisions are made to allow for the insertion of surgical tools to complete the procedure.</li><li><strong>Robotic hernia repair</strong><strong>,</strong> like laparoscopic surgery, uses a laparoscope and is performed with small incisions. With robotic surgery, the surgeon is seated at a console in the operating room and handles the surgical instruments from the console. While robotic surgery can be used for some smaller hernias or weak areas, it can now also be used to reconstruct the abdominal wall.</li></ul>




--------------------RESPIRATORY-----------------
-----------ASTHMA-----------------
<p><strong>Asthma</strong></p><p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>Asthma is a condition in which your airways narrow and swell and may produce extra mucus. This can make breathing difficult and trigger coughing, a whistling sound (wheezing) when you breathe out, and shortness of breath. Severe asthma can cause trouble talking or being active. You might hear your doctor call it a chronic respiratory disease. Some people refer to asthma as bronchial asthma.</p><p>It&rsquo;s the most common chronic condition among American children: 1 child out of every 12 has asthma</p><h2><strong>Types</strong></h2><p>Asthma can occur in many different ways and for many different reasons, but the triggers are often the same. They include airborne pollutants, viruses, pet dander, mold, and cigarette smoke.</p><h3><strong>Childhood asthma</strong></h3><p>Asthma is the most common chronic condition in children. It can develop at any age, but it is slightly more common in children than in adults. According to the American Lung Association, some common triggers of childhood asthma include:</p><ul><li>respiratory infections and colds</li><li>cigarette smoke, including secondhand tobacco smoke</li><li>allergens</li><li>air pollutants, including ozone and particle pollution, both indoors and outside</li><li>exposure to cold air</li><li>sudden changes in temperature</li><li>excitement</li><li>stress</li><li>exercise</li></ul><p>In some cases, asthma may improve as the child reaches adulthood. For many people, however, it is a lifelong condition.</p><h3><strong>Adult-onset asthma</strong></h3><p>Asthma can develop at any age, including during adulthood. Some factors that affect the risk of developing asthma in adulthood include:</p><ul><li>respiratory illness</li><li>allergies and exposure to allergens</li><li>hormonal factors</li><li>obesity</li><li>stress</li><li>Smoking</li></ul><p><strong>Occupational asthma</strong></p><p>Occupational asthma results&nbsp;from exposure to an allergen or irritant present in the workplace. In the following occupations, irritants can trigger asthma symptoms:</p><ul><li>car repairs and manufacturing</li><li>engineering and metalwork</li><li>woodwork and carpentry</li><li>electronics and assembly industries</li><li>hairdressing salons</li><li>indoor swimming pools</li></ul><h3><strong>Seasonal asthma</strong></h3><p>This type of asthma occurs in response to allergens that are only in the surrounding environment at certain times of the year. For example, cold air in the winter or pollen in the spring or summer may trigger symptoms of seasonal asthma. People with seasonal asthma still have the condition for the rest of the year, but they usually do not experience symptoms.</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>Health professionals do not know exactly what causes asthma, but genetic and environmental factors both seem to play significant roles.</p><p>A number of factors are thought to increase your chances of developing asthma. They include:</p><ul><ul><li>Having a blood relative with asthma, such as a parent or sibling</li><li>Having another allergic condition, such as atopic dermatitis &mdash; which causes red, itchy skin &mdash; or hay fever &mdash; which causes a runny nose, congestion, and itchy eyes</li><li>Being overweight</li><li>Being a smoker</li><li>Exposure to secondhand smoke</li><li>Exposure to exhaust fumes or other types of pollution</li></ul></ul><ul><li><strong>Exposure to occupational triggers, such as chemicals used in farming, hairdressing, and manufacturing</strong></li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>Asthma symptoms vary from person to person. You may have infrequent asthma attacks, have symptoms only at certain times &mdash; such as when exercising &mdash; or have symptoms all the time.</p><ul><li>coughing, especially at night, when laughing, or during exercise</li><li>tightness in the chest</li><li>shortness of breath</li><li>difficulty talking</li><li>anxiousness or panic</li><li>Fatigue</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>A doctor will ask the person about their symptoms, their family medical history, and their personal medical history. They will also carry out a physical examination, and they may conduct some other tests.</p><p><strong>Physical exam: </strong>Your doctor will listen to your breathing with a stethoscope. You may also be given a skin test to look for signs of an allergic reaction, such as hives or eczema. Allergies increase your risk of asthma.</p><p><strong>Lung Function Tests</strong>: These asthma tests see how well your lungs work.&nbsp;</p><ul><li><p><strong>Spirometry</strong>: This simple breathing test measures how much air you blow out and how fast.&nbsp;</p></li><li><strong>Peak flow</strong>: It can help you know what makes your asthma worse, whether your treatment is working, and when you need emergency care.</li><li><strong>Exhaled nitric oxide test. </strong>You&rsquo;ll breathe into a tube connected to a machine that measures the amount of nitric oxide in your breath. Your body makes this gas normally, but levels could be high if your airways are inflamed.</li></ul><p><strong>Chest X-Ray: </strong>By viewing an X-ray of your lungs, your doctor can see if asthma is likely to be causing your symptoms.</p><p><strong>Sinuses</strong>: Your doctor may order a special sinus X-ray, called a CT scan, to examine your sinuses if they think you have an infection. If you have sinusitis, you will be treated with antibiotics for at least 10 to 12 days. Treating sinusitis may help prevent asthma symptoms.</p>

<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>There is no cure for asthma, but symptoms can be controlled with effective asthma treatment and management. This involves taking your medications as directed and learning to avoid triggers that cause your asthma symptoms.</p><p>Treatments for asthma fall into three primary categories:</p><ul><li><strong>breathing exercises</strong>: These exercises can help you get more air into and out of your lungs. Over time, this may help increase lung capacity and cut down on severe asthma symptoms.</li><li><strong>quick-acting treatments:</strong> These medications should only be used in the event of asthma symptoms or an attack. They provide quick relief to help you breathe again.</li><li><strong>long-term asthma control medications:</strong> These medications, taken daily, help reduce the number and severity of your asthma symptoms, but they don&rsquo;t manage the immediate symptoms of an attack. Long-term asthma control medications include the following: Anti-inflammatories, Anticholinergics, Long-acting bronchodilators, Biologic therapy drugs.</li></ul><p>&nbsp;Your doctor will recommend one treatment or combination of treatments based on:</p><ul><li>the type of asthma you have</li><li>your age</li><li>your triggers</li></ul><h3><strong>Avoid your triggers</strong></h3><p>Taking steps to reduce your exposure to asthma triggers is a key part of asthma control. To reduce your exposure, you should:</p><ul><li><strong>Use your air conditioner: </strong>&nbsp;Air conditioning reduces the amount of airborne pollen from trees, grasses, and weeds that find its way indoors. If you don't have air conditioning, try to keep your windows closed during the pollen season.</li><li><strong>Decontaminate your decor:</strong> Minimize dust that may worsen nighttime symptoms by replacing certain items in your bedroom. Use washable curtains and blinds.</li><li><strong>Maintain optimal humidity:</strong> If you live in a damp climate, talk to your doctor about using a dehumidifier.</li><li><strong>Prevent mold spores:</strong> Clean damp areas in the bathroom, kitchen, and around the house.</li><li><strong>Reduce pet dander:</strong> If you're allergic to dander, avoid pets with fur or feathers.&nbsp;</li><li><strong>Clean regularly:</strong> Clean your home at least once a week.</li><li><strong>Cover your nose and mouth if it's cold out.</strong> If your asthma is worsened by cold or dry air, wearing a face mask can help.</li></ul>



--------------Bronchitis--------------------------

<h2><strong>Overview:</strong></h2><p>Bronchitis is when the tubes that carry air to your lungs, called the bronchial tubes, get inflamed and swollen. You end up with a nagging cough and mucus. Bronchitis can be acute or chronic.</p><p>Acute bronchitis develops from a cold or other respiratory infection and often improves within a few days without lasting effects. Chronic bronchitis is a more serious condition that develops over time rather than striking suddenly. It&rsquo;s characterized by recurrent episodes of bronchitis that last for several months or years.</p><p>The constant inflammation in the lining of the bronchial tubes causes excessive amounts of sticky mucus to build up in the airways. This restricts the amount of airflow going into and out of the lungs. The blockage in airflow gets worse over time, resulting in breathing difficulties and increased mucus production in the lungs.</p><h2><strong>Causes</strong></h2><p>The cause of chronic bronchitis is usually long-term exposure to irritants that damage your lungs and airways. Acute bronchitis is usually caused by viruses, typically the same viruses that cause colds and flu (influenza). Antibiotics don't kill viruses, so this type of medication isn't useful in most cases of bronchitis.&nbsp;</p><p>Chronic bronchitis causes include:</p><ul><li>Breathing in air pollution and other things that bother your lungs, like chemical fumes or dust, over time</li><li>Smoking or breathing in secondhand smoke for a long time</li></ul><h2>Risk factors</h2><p>Factors that increase your risk of bronchitis include:</p><ul><li><strong>Cigarette smoke.</strong> People who smoke or who live with a smoker are at higher risk of both acute bronchitis and chronic bronchitis.</li><li><strong>Low resistance.</strong> This may result from another acute illness, such as a cold, or from a chronic condition that compromises your immune system. Older adults, infants and young children have greater vulnerability to infection.</li><li><strong>Exposure to irritants on the job.</strong> Your risk of developing bronchitis is greater if you work around certain lung irritants, such as grains or textiles, or are exposed to chemical fumes.</li><li><strong>Gastric reflux.</strong> Repeated bouts of severe heartburn can irritate your throat and make you more prone to developing bronchitis.</li></ul>

<h2>Symptoms:</h2><p>Signs and symptoms of both acute and chronic bronchitis include:</p><ul><li>a persistent cough, which may produce mucus</li><li>wheezing</li><li>a low fever and chills</li><li>a feeling of tightness in the chest</li><li>a sore throat</li><li>body aches</li><li>breathlessness</li><li>headaches</li><li>a blocked nose and sinuses</li></ul><p>However, bronchitis is not the only condition that causes a cough. A cough that refuses to go away may be a sign of asthma, pneumonia, or many other conditions. Anyone with a persistent cough should see a doctor for a diagnosis.</p><h2><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></h2><p>During the first few days of illness, it can be difficult to distinguish the signs and symptoms of bronchitis from those of a common cold.A doctor will carry out a physical examination, using a stethoscope to listen for unusual sounds in the lungs.</p><ul><li>A chest X-ray can help rule out other lung conditions, such as pneumonia, that may be causing your cough.</li><li>Sputum is the mucus that you cough up from your lungs. Testing and analyzing the sputum can confirm the presence of bacteria and help your doctor determine the underlying cause of your symptoms.</li><li>A pulmonary function test allows your doctor to evaluate how well your lungs are functioning. It can check for signs of asthma or emphysema by measuring how well you&rsquo;re able to breathe and how easily your lungs are able to send oxygen to the rest of your body.</li><li>During a CT scan, your doctor takes high-resolution X-rays of your body from various angles, allowing your doctor to see your lungs and other organs in more detail.</li></ul>

<h2><strong>Treatment:</strong></h2><p>Although there&rsquo;s no cure for chronic bronchitis, the disease can be managed with medical treatment and lifestyle adjustments, especially when a diagnosis is made early on. Don&rsquo;t be surprised if your doctor simply recommends rest and lots of fluids. About acute bronchitis will often fade away on its own. Letting your body rest and drinking plenty of fluids may help it disappear more quickly.&nbsp;</p><p>The symptoms of chronic bronchitis may resolve or improve for a while. However, they will come back or become worse again, especially if there is exposure to smoke or other triggers.</p><p>Options that may help include:</p><ul><li>Cough medicine: Coughing is useful for removing mucus from the bronchial tubes, but medication can help bring relief, for example, at night.</li></ul><ul><li>Taking honey: Taking 2 spoonfuls of honey may bring relief of cough symptoms.</li><li>Using a humidifier: This can loosen mucus, improve airflow, and relieve wheezing.</li><li>Bronchodilators: These open the bronchial tubes and may help clear out mucus.</li><li>Mucolytics: These loosen or thin mucus in the airways, making it easier to cough up sputum.</li><li>Anti-inflammatory and steroid drugs: These can help reduce inflammation that can cause tissue damage.</li><li>Oxygen therapy: In severe cases, a person may need supplemental oxygen to ease their breathing.</li></ul><h2><strong>Prevention</strong></h2><p>It is not always possible to prevent acute or chronic bronchitis, but several things can reduce the risk.</p><p>These include:</p><ul><li>avoiding or quit smoking</li><li>avoiding lung irritants, such as smoke, dust, fumes, vapors, and air pollution</li><li>wearing a mask to cover the nose and mouth when pollution levels are high</li><li>washing the hands often to limit exposure to germs and bacteria</li><li>asking about vaccinations to protect from pneumonia and the flu</li></ul>


----------------------Pneumonia---------------------------


<p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>Pneumonia is a lung infection that can range from mild to so severe that you have to go to the hospital. Bacteria, viruses, and fungi cause it.</p><p>The infection causes inflammation in the air sacs in your lungs, which are called alveoli. The alveoli fill with fluid or pus, making it difficult to breathe.</p><p>Infants younger than age 2 and people over age 65 are at higher risk. That&rsquo;s because their immune systems might not be strong enough to fight it. In the United States (U.S.), around 1 million people are treated in the hospital for pneumonia each year, and around 50,000 die from the disease.</p><p>The germs that cause pneumonia are contagious. This means they can spread from person to person.</p><p>Both viral and bacterial pneumonia can spread to others through inhalation of airborne droplets from a sneeze or cough. You can also get these types of pneumonia by coming into contact with surfaces or objects that are contaminated with pneumonia-causing bacteria or viruses.</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>There are several types of infectious agents that can cause pneumonia.</p><h3>Bacterial pneumonia: The most common cause of bacterial pneumonia is <em>Streptococcus pneumoniae</em>. Other causes include:</h3><ul><li>Mycoplasma pneumoniae</li><li><em>Haemophilus influenzae</em></li><li>Legionella pneumophila</li></ul><h3>Viral pneumonia: Respiratory viruses are often the cause of pneumonia. Some examples include:</h3><ul><li>influenza (flu)</li><li>respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)</li><li>rhinoviruses (common cold)</li></ul><p>Viral pneumonia is usually milder and can improve in one to three weeks without treatment.</p><p>Fungal pneumonia: Fungi from soil or bird droppings can cause pneumonia. They most often cause pneumonia in people with weakened immune systems.</p>

<h3>Symptoms:&nbsp;</h3><p>Pneumonia symptoms can be mild to life-threatening. They can include:</p><ul><li>cough</li><li>rusty or green phlegm, or sputum, coughed up from lungs</li><li>fever</li><li>fast breathing and shortness of breath</li><li>shaking chills</li><li>chest pain that usually worsens when taking a deep breath, known as pleuritic pain</li><li>fast heartbeat</li><li>fatigue and weakness</li><li>nausea and vomiting</li><li>diarrhea</li><li>sweating</li><li>headache</li><li>muscle pain</li><li>confusion or delirium, especially in older adults</li><li>dusky or purplish skin color, or cyanosis, from poorly oxygenated blood</li></ul><p>Symptoms can vary depending on other underlying conditions and the type of pneumonia.</p><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>Your doctor will start by asking about your medical history and doing a physical exam, including listening to your lungs with a stethoscope to check for abnormal bubbling or crackling sounds that suggest pneumonia.Depending on the severity of your symptoms and your risk for complications, your doctor may also order one or more of these tests:Depending on the severity of your symptoms and your risk for complications, your doctor may also order one or more of these tests:</p><ul><li><strong>Chest X-ray: </strong>This helps your doctor diagnose pneumonia and determine the extent and location of the infection. However, it can't tell your doctor what kind of germ is causing the pneumonia.</li><li><strong>Blood cultures:</strong> It may reveal whether the microorganism from the lungs has spread into the bloodstream.</li><li><strong>An arterial blood gas (ABG): </strong>This type of blood test may provide a more accurate reading of the body&rsquo;s oxygen and carbon dioxide levels and other factors.</li><li><strong>Sputum analysis: </strong>It can determine which organism is causing the pneumonia.</li><li><strong>CT scan</strong>: If your pneumonia isn't clearing as quickly as expected, your doctor may recommend a chest CT scan to obtain a more detailed image of your lungs.</li><li><strong>Pleural fluid culture:</strong> A fluid sample is taken by putting a needle between your ribs from the pleural area and analyzed to help determine the type of infection.</li><li><strong>Bronchoscopy: </strong>A bronchoscopy looks into the airways in your lungs. It does this using a camera on the end of a flexible tube that&rsquo;s gently guided down your throat and into your lungs.</li></ul>

<h3><strong>Treatment:</strong></h3><p>Treatment depends on the type and severity of the pneumonia.</p><ul><li>Bacterial types of pneumonia are usually treated with antibiotics.</li><li>Viral types of pneumonia are usually treated with rest and plenty of fluids. Antiviral medications can be used in influenza.</li><li>Fungal types of pneumonia are usually treated with antifungal medications.</li></ul><p>If it becomes severe, you may have to stay in the hospital for treatment. While you&rsquo;re there, your doctor will probably give you fluids or antibiotics through an IV tube. You may even need oxygen therapy or breathing treatments.</p><p><strong>Pneumonia prevention</strong></p><p>In many cases, pneumonia can be prevented.</p><h3><strong>Vaccination</strong></h3><p>The first line of defense against pneumonia is to get vaccinated. There are several vaccines that can help prevent pneumonia.</p><p>In addition to vaccination, there are other things you can to avoid pneumonia:</p><ul><li>If you smoke, try to quit. Smoking makes you more susceptible to respiratory infections, especially pneumonia.</li><li>Regularly wash your hands with soap and water.</li><li>Cover your coughs and sneezes. Promptly dispose used tissues.</li><li>Maintain a healthy lifestyle to strengthen your immune system. Get enough rest, eat a healthy diet, and get regular exercise.</li></ul>


----------------------------Tuberculosis-----------------------------


<p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>Tuberculosis (TB) is a potentially serious infectious disease that mainly affects your lungs. The bacteria that cause tuberculosis are spread from one person to another through tiny droplets released into the air via coughs and sneezes. A person may develop TB after inhaling <em>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</em> (<em>M. tuberculosis</em>) bacteria. A person may never experience symptoms and be unaware that they have the infection. There is also no risk of passing on a latent infection to another person. The risk of developing active TB is higher in:</p><ul><li>anyone with a weakened immune system</li><li>anyone who first developed the infection in the past 2&ndash;5 years</li><li>older adults and young children</li><li>people who use injected recreational drugs</li><li>people who have not received appropriate treatment for TB in the past&nbsp;</li></ul><p>Causes:</p><p>Tuberculosis is caused by bacteria that spread from person to person through microscopic droplets released into the air. This can happen when someone with the untreated, active form of tuberculosis coughs, speaks, sneezes, spits, laughs, or sings.</p><p>The risk of getting pulmonary TB is highest for people who are in close contact with those who have TB. This includes being around family or friends with TB or working in places such as the following that often house people with TB:</p><ul><li>correctional facilities</li><li>group homes</li><li>nursing homes</li><li>hospitals</li><li>shelters</li></ul><p>People also at risk for developing pulmonary TB disease are:</p><ul><li>older adults</li><li>small children</li><li>people who smoke</li><li>people with an autoimmune disorder, such as lupus or rheumatoid arthritis</li><li>people with lifelong conditions, such as diabetes or kidney disease</li><li>people who inject drugs</li><li>people who are immunocompromised, such as those living with HIV, undergoing chemotherapy&nbsp;or taking chronic steroids</li></ul><p>Symp risk for getting pulmonary TB is highest for people who are in close contact with those who have TB. This includes being around family or friends with TB or working in places such as the following that often house people with TB:</p><ul><li>correctional facilities</li><li>group homes</li><li>nursing homes</li><li>hospitals</li><li>shelters</li></ul><p>People also at risk for developing pulmonary TB disease are:</p><ul><li>older adults</li><li>small children</li><li>people who smoke</li><li>people with an autoimmune disorder, such as lupus or rheumatoid arthritis</li><li>people with lifelong conditions, such as diabetes or kidney disease</li><li>people who inject drugs</li><li>people who are immunocompromised, such as those living with chemotherapy&nbsp;or taking chronic steroids</li></ul>

<h3>Symptoms:</h3><p>if you have tuberculosis, you may not have any symptoms. That&rsquo;s because the germs that cause this illness can live in your body without making you sick. In fact, most people who get infected with TB are able to fight the germs before they spread. Doctors call this &ldquo;latent TB&rdquo; infection.</p><p>But if the germs begin to multiply, you&rsquo;ll become sick with tuberculosis. Doctors call this &ldquo;active TB.&rdquo;</p><ul><li>A bad cough that lasts 3 weeks or longer</li><li>Weight loss</li><li>Loss of appetite</li><li>Coughing up blood or mucus</li><li>Weakness or fatigue</li><li>Fever</li><li>Night sweats</li><li>chest pains</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>During the physical exam, your doctor will check your lymph nodes for swelling and use a stethoscope to listen carefully to the sounds your lungs make while you breathe. Two tests can show whether TB bacteria are present:</p><ul><li>the TB skin test</li><li>the TB blood test</li></ul><p>However, these cannot indicate whether TB is active or latent. To test for active TB disease, the doctor may recommend a sputum test and a chest X-ray. Everyone with TB needs treatment, regardless of whether the infection is active or latent.</p>

<p>Treatment:</p><p>With the proper treatment, tuberculosis (TB, for short) is almost always curable. Medications are the cornerstone of tuberculosis treatment. But treating TB takes much longer than treating other types of bacterial infections.</p><p>For active tuberculosis, you must take antibiotics for at least six to nine months. The exact drugs and length of treatment depend on your age, overall health, possible drug resistance, and the infection's location in the body.</p><p>If you have drug-resistant TB, a combination of antibiotics called fluoroquinolones and injectable medications It is essential to complete the full course of treatment, even if symptoms go away. If a person stops taking their medication early, some bacteria can survive and become resistant to antibiotics. In this case, the person may go on to develop drug-resistant TB.</p><h2><strong>Prevention</strong></h2><p>Ways of preventing TB from infecting others include:</p><ul><li>getting a diagnosis and treatment early</li><li>staying away from other people until there is no longer a risk of infection</li><li>wearing a mask, covering the mouth, and ventilating rooms</li></ul><h3><strong>TB vaccination</strong></h3><p>In some countries, children receive an anti-TB vaccination &mdash; the Bacillus Calmette&ndash;Gu&eacute;rin (BCG) vaccine &mdash; as part of a regular immunization program.</p><p>However, experts in the U.S. do not recommend BCG inoculation for most people unless they have a high risk of TB. Some of the reasons include a low risk of infection in the country and a high likelihood that the vaccine will interfere with any future TB skin tests.</p><h2><strong>Preventing the Spread of TB</strong></h2><p>If you have active TB of the lungs, you can infect other people. For that reason, your doctor will tell you to stay home during the first few weeks of treatment, until you&rsquo;re no longer contagious. During that time, you should avoid public places and people with weakened immune systems, like young children, the elderly, and people with HIV. You&rsquo;ll have to wear a special mask if you have visitors or need to go to the doctor&rsquo;s office.</p>


-------------------Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease(COPD)----------------------


<p><strong>Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease(COPD)</strong></p><p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, commonly referred to as COPD, is a group of progressive lung diseases. It is a long-term lung condition that makes it hard for you to breathe.</p><p>Although you can&rsquo;t reverse the lung damage, medication, and lifestyle changes can help you manage the symptoms. Chronic bronchitis and emphysema both can result in COPD. A COPD diagnosis means you may have one of these lung-damaging diseases or symptoms of both.&nbsp;</p><p>Emphysema is the breakdown of the walls of the tiny air sacs (alveoli) at the end of the bronchial tubes, in the &ldquo;bottom&rdquo; of the lung.&nbsp;</p><p><strong>COPD affects nearly 16 million Americans or about 6% of the U.S. population.</strong></p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>Smoking tobacco causes up to 90% of COPD cases. About 90 percent of people who have COPD are smokers or former smokers. Other causes include:</p><ul><ul><li>Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency, a genetic disorder.</li><li>Secondhand smoke.</li><li>Air pollution.</li><li>Workplace dust and fumes.</li><li>Your genes</li></ul></ul><ul><li><strong><strong>Asthma</strong></strong></li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>COPD symptoms often don't appear until significant lung damage has occurred, and they usually worsen over time, particularly if smoking exposure continues. At first, symptoms of COPD can be quite mild. You might mistake them for a cold.</p><p>Early symptoms include:</p><ul><li>occasional shortness of breath, especially after exercise</li><li>mild but recurrent cough</li><li>needing to clear your throat often, especially first thing in the morning</li></ul><p>As the lungs become more damaged, you may experience:</p><ul><li>&nbsp;Shortness of breath, especially during physical activities</li><li>Wheezing</li><li>Chest tightness</li><li>A chronic cough that may produce mucus (sputum) that may be clear, white, yellow or greenish</li><li>Frequent respiratory infections</li><li>Lack of energy</li><li>Unintended weight loss (in later stages)</li><li>Swelling in ankles, feet or legs</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>Finding out whether you have COPD can take several steps. This includes talking with your doctor and getting tests, many of which are straightforward and painless. When you visit the doctor, be sure to mention all of your symptoms. Tell your doctor if:</p><ul><li>you&rsquo;re a smoker or have smoked in the past</li><li>you&rsquo;re exposed to lung irritants on the job</li><li>you&rsquo;re exposed to a lot of secondhand smoke</li><li>you have a family history of COPD</li><li>you have asthma or other respiratory conditions</li><li>you take over-the-counter or prescription medications</li></ul><p><strong>Stethoscope:</strong> You may see your doctor wearing one around her neck. She will place the instrument on your chest to listen for anything unusual such as wheezing. Based on what she hears, she may recommend more tests.</p><p><strong>Spirometry:&nbsp;</strong>Spirometry is a noninvasive test to assess lung function. During the test, you&rsquo;ll take a deep breath and then blow into a tube connected to the spirometer</p><p><strong>Chest X-ray: </strong>This creates an image of your chest, including your heart, lungs, and blood vessels. This shows whether there are problems in the lungs, including other diseases such as pneumonia, cancer, and heart failure</p><p><strong>Arterial Blood Gas</strong>: An arterial blood gas test involves taking a blood sample from an artery to measure your blood oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other important levels.</p>

<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>The goal of treating COPD is to help you breathe easier and get you back to your regular activities. Your doctor has a number of options to choose from. Your healthcare team may include a lung specialist (pulmonologist) and physical and respiratory therapists.</p><p><strong>Medication:&nbsp;</strong>medications work quickly to relax the muscles around your airways and ease symptoms like coughing and shortness of breath. You take them through an inhaler. The effects last for about 4 to 6 hours. You use them only when you have symptoms, or before you exercise.</p><p><strong>Oxygen therapy: </strong>If your blood oxygen level is too low, you can receive supplemental oxygen through a mask or nasal cannula to help you breathe better. A portable unit can make it easier to get around.</p><p><strong>Steroids: </strong>These bring down the swelling in your airways. You usually breathe them in through an inhaler. Inhaled steroids can help if you have many COPD flare-ups. You might take steroids as a pill if your symptoms get worse.</p><p><strong>Surgery: </strong>Surgery is reserved for severe COPD or when other treatments have failed, which is more likely when you have a form of severe emphysema.</p><p>One type of surgery is called bullectomy. During this procedure, surgeons remove large, abnormal air spaces (bullae) from the lungs.</p><p>Another is lung volume reduction surgery, which removes damaged upper lung tissue.</p><p>Lung transplantation is an option in some cases.</p><p><strong>Antibiotics: </strong>An infection can make your COPD symptoms worse. Your doctor will give you antibiotics to kill the bacteria and treat the infection.</p><p>Take all the medicine you're prescribed. If you stop taking the antibiotics too early, the infection could come back.</p><p><strong>Lifestyle Changes</strong></p><p>Certain lifestyle changes may also help alleviate your symptoms or provide relief.</p><p><strong>Cigarette smoke</strong> is the leading cause of COPD, and it can make the disease worse. It may not be easy for you to quit, but there are many ways to get help. Ask your doctor about nicotine replacement, medicine, and counseling.</p><p><strong>Talk to a dietitian:&nbsp;</strong>Get the nutrition your body needs. Work with your doctor or dietician to create a healthy eating plan.</p><p><strong>Exercise.</strong> This is also important when you have COPD. It strengthens the muscles that help you breathe.</p><p>Your doctor can help you design a fitness program that's safe for you. You'll also learn breathing techniques to help you exercise.</p>


-------------------------SWINE FLU -----------------------------------------------


<p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>H1N1 flu is also known as swine flu. It's called swine flu because in the past, the people who caught it had direct contact with pigs. Swine flu can affect both pigs and humans. It is a respiratory disease that results from an influenza A virus.</p><p>In 2009, H1N1 was spreading fast around the world, so the World Health Organization called it a pandemic. It continues to spread during flu season like other strains of the flu. Like other strains of the flu, H1N1 is highly contagious, allowing it to spread quickly from person to person. A simple sneeze can cause thousands of germs to spread through the air. The virus can linger on tables and surface areas like doorknobs, waiting to be picked up.</p><p>Causes:</p><p>Swine flu is caused by a strain of influenza virus that usually only infects pigs. Unlike typhus, which can be transmitted by lice or ticks, the transmission usually occurs from person to person, not animal to person.</p><p>You can&rsquo;t catch swine flu from eating properly cooked pork products</p><p>Swine farmers and veterinarians have the highest risk of exposure to true swine flu because they work with and are near pigs.</p><h2>Complications</h2><p>Influenza complications include:</p><ul><li>Worsening of chronic conditions, such as heart disease and asthma</li><li>Pneumonia</li><li>Neurological signs and symptoms, ranging from confusion to seizures</li><li>Respiratory failure</li></ul>

<h2><strong>Symptoms</strong></h2><p>The signs and symptoms of swine flu are similar to those of infections caused by other flu strains and can include:</p><ul><li>chills</li><li>fever</li><li>coughing</li><li>sore throat</li><li>runny or stuffy nose</li><li>body aches</li><li>fatigue</li><li>diarrhea</li><li>nausea and vomiting</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>To diagnose flu, including swine flu, your doctor will likely conduct a physical exam, look for signs and symptoms of influenza, and possibly order a test that detects influenza viruses.</p><p>Your doctor can make a diagnosis by sampling fluid from your body. To take a sample, your doctor or a nurse may swab your nose or throat.</p><p>The swab will be analyzed using various genetic and laboratory techniques to identify the specific type of virus.</p>

<h2><strong>Treatment:</strong></h2><p>Some of the same antiviral drugs that are used to treat seasonal flu also work against H1N1 swine flu. Most cases of swine flu don&rsquo;t require medication for treatment. You don&rsquo;t need to see a doctor unless you&rsquo;re at risk of developing medical complications from the flu. You should focus on relieving your symptoms and preventing the spread of the H1N1 to other people.</p><p>Antibiotics won't do anything for you. That&rsquo;s because the flu is caused by a virus, not bacteria. Over-the-counter pain remedies and cold and flu medications can help relieve aches, pains, and fever. Don't give aspirin to children under age 18 because of the risk of Reye&rsquo;s syndrome. Make sure that over-the-counter cold medications do not have aspirin before giving them to children.</p><h2><strong>Lifestyle and home remedies</strong></h2><p>If you develop any type of flu, these measures may help ease your symptoms:</p><ul><li><strong>Drink plenty of liquids.</strong> Choose water, juice, and warm soups to prevent dehydration.</li><li><strong>Rest.</strong> Get more sleep to help your immune system fight infection.</li><li><strong>Consider pain relievers.</strong> Use an over-the-counter pain reliever, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol, others) or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), cautiously. Also, use caution when giving aspirin to children or teenagers.</li></ul><h2><strong>Preventing swine flu</strong></h2><p>The best way to prevent swine flu is to get a yearly flu vaccination. Other easy ways to prevent swine flu include:</p><ul><li>frequently washing hands with soap or hand sanitizer</li><li>not touching your nose, mouth, or eyes (The virus can survive on surfaces like telephones and tabletops.)</li><li>staying home from work or school if you&rsquo;re ill</li><li>avoiding large gatherings when swine flu is in season</li></ul>




-------------------------KIDNEY-------------------------------------
---------------CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE----------------------------------

<p><strong>CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE</strong></p><p><strong>Summary:-</strong></p><p>Chronic kidney disease (CKD), also called chronic kidney failure it describes the gradual loss of kidney function. Your kidneys filter wastes and excess fluids from your blood, which are then excreted in your urine. When chronic kidney disease reaches an advanced stage, dangerous levels of fluid, electrolytes, and wastes can build up in your body. In the early stages of chronic kidney disease, you may have few signs or symptoms. Chronic kidney disease may not become apparent until your kidney function is significantly impaired.</p><p><strong>Causes:-</strong></p><p>The two main causes of chronic kidney disease are diabetes and high blood pressure, which are responsible for up to two-thirds of the cases. Diabetes happens when your blood sugar is too high, causing damage to many organs in your body, including the kidneys and heart, as well as blood vessels, nerves and eyes</p><p>It also occurs when a disease or condition impairs kidney function, causing kidney damage to worsen over several months or year</p>


<p><strong>Symptoms:-</strong></p><ul><li>Nausea</li><li>Vomiting</li><li>Loss of appetite</li><li>Fatigue and weakness</li><li>Sleep problems</li><li>Changes in how much you urinate</li><li>Decreased mental sharpness</li><li>Muscle twitches and cramps</li><li>Swelling of feet and ankles</li><li>Chest pain, if fluid builds up around the lining of the heart</li><li>Shortness of breath, if fluid builds up in the lungs</li><li>High blood pressure (hypertension) that's difficult to contro<strong>l</strong></li></ul>


<p><strong>Treatment:-</strong></p><p>Treatment can be merely classified four main categories:-</p><p>&Oslash;Medical procedure</p><p>&Oslash;Self-care</p><p>&Oslash;Medications</p><p>&Oslash;Surgery</p><p><strong>Medical procedure:-</strong></p><p>1. Peritoneal dialysis -</p><p>A home-based therapy that uses the natural lining of the abdomen as a filter to clean the blood when the kidneys can no longer do so.</p><p>2. Hemofiltration -</p><p>Using filters outside the body to clean the blood when the kidneys are injured.</p><p>3. Dialysis &ndash;</p><p>Using a machine to clean the blood when the kidneys can no longer do so.</p><p><strong>SELF CARE:-</strong></p><p><strong>Low protein diet :</strong></p><p>A diet that reduces the consumption of meats, fish, and cheese used to treat certain kidney and metabolic diseases.</p><p><strong>MEDICATION:-</strong></p><ul><li>Vitamin</li><li>Helps promote normal body function, growth, and development.</li><li>Calcium reducer</li><li>Decreases the amount of calcium in the blood.</li><li>Bone marrow stimulant</li><li>Helps bone marrow produce new blood cells.</li><li>Diuretic</li><li>Taking medicine that helps eliminate extra water from the body. It's also prescribed to treat high blood pressure.</li><li>Dietary supplement</li><li>Works alone or in conjunction with other treatments to promote health.</li></ul><p><strong>SURGERY:-</strong></p><p><strong>Kidney transplantation</strong></p><p>Surgical replacement of a diseased kidney with one from a living or deceased donor.</p>



---------------------KIDNEY STONE (nephrolithiasis)-------------------------
<p><strong>Summary</strong><strong>:-</strong></p><p><strong>&nbsp;</strong>Kidneys remove waste and fluid from your blood to make urine. Sometimes, when you have too much of certain wastes and not enough fluid in your blood, these wastes can build up and stick together in your kidneys. These clumps of waste are called kidney stones also called nephrolithiasis. Kidney stones are hard deposits of minerals and acid salts that stick together in concentrated urine. They can be painful when passing through the urinary tract, but usually don't cause permanent damage. The most common symptom is severe pain, usually in the side of the abdomen, that's often associated with nausea.</p><p>Treatment includes pain relievers and drinking lots of water to help pass the stone. Medical procedures may be required to remove or break up larger stones.</p><p><strong>Causes:-</strong></p><ul><li>Don&rsquo;t drink enough water.</li><li>Someone in your family has had kidney stones.</li><li>Follow a diet high in protein, sodium and/or sugar.</li><li>overweight or obese</li><li>If had gastric bypass surgery or another intestinal surgery.</li><li>Have polycystic kidney disease or another cystic kidney disease.</li><li>Have a certain condition that causes your urine to contain high levels of cystine, oxalate, uric acid or calcium.</li><li>Condition that causes swelling or irritation in your bowel or your joints.</li><li>You take certain medicines, such as diuretics (water pills) or calcium-based antacids.</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:-</strong></p><ul><li>Pain while urinating</li><li>Blood in your urine</li><li>Sharp pain in your back or lower abdomen</li><li>Nausea and vomiting</li><li>Sweating</li></ul>

<p><strong>Treatment:-</strong></p><p>The best way to prevent most kidney stones is to drink enough water every day.</p><p>Small stones with minimal symptoms:-</p><p>Most small kidney stones won't require invasive treatment. You may be able to pass a small stone by:</p><ul><li>Drinking water. Drinking as much as water a day will keep your urine dilute and may prevent stones from forming. Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, drink enough fluid,ideally mostly water ,to produce clear or nearly clear urine.</li><li>Pain relievers. Passing a small stone can cause some discomfort. To relieve mild pain, your doctor may recommend pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) or naproxen sodium (Aleve).</li><li>Medical therapy. Your doctor may give you a medication to help pass your kidney stone. This type of medication, known as an alpha blocker, relaxes the muscles in your ureter, helping you pass the kidney stone more quickly and with less pain. Examples of alpha blockers include tamsulosin (Flomax) and the drug combination dutasteride and tamsulosin (Jalyn)</li></ul><p>Large stones symptoms:-</p><p>Kidney stones that are too large to pass on their own or cause bleeding, kidney damage or ongoing urinary tract infections may require more-extensive treatment. Procedures may include:</p><ul><li>Using sound waves to break up stones. For certain kidney stones &mdash; depending on size and location &mdash; your doctor may recommend a procedure called extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL).</li></ul><p>ESWL uses sound waves to create strong vibrations (shock waves) that break the stones into tiny pieces that can be passed in your urine. The procedure lasts about 45 to 60 minutes and can cause moderate pain, so you may be under sedation or light anesthesia to make you comfortable.</p><p>ESWL can cause blood in the urine, bruising on the back or abdomen, bleeding around the kidney and other adjacent organs, and discomfort as the stone fragments pass through the urinary tract.</p><ul><li>Surgery to remove very large stones in the kidney. A procedure called percutaneous nephrolithotomy involves surgically removing a kidney stone using small telescopes and instruments inserted through a small incision in your back.</li></ul><p>You will receive general anesthesia during the surgery and be in the hospital for one to two days while you recover. Your doctor may recommend this surgery if ESWL is unsuccessful.</p><ul><li>Using a scope to remove stones. To remove a smaller stone in your ureter or kidney, your doctor may pass a thin lighted tube (ureteroscope) equipped with a camera through your urethra and bladder to your ureter.</li></ul><p>Once the stone is located, special tools can snare the stone or break it into pieces that will pass in your urine. Your doctor may then place a small tube (stent) in the ureter to relieve swelling and promote healing. You may need general or local anesthesia during this procedure.</p><ul><li>Parathyroid gland surgery. Some calcium phosphate stones are caused by overactive parathyroid glands, which are located on the four corners of your thyroid gland, just below your Adam's apple. When these glands produce too much parathyroid hormone (hyperparathyroidism), your calcium levels can become too high and kidney stones may form as a result.</li></ul><p>Hyperparathyroidism sometimes occurs when a small, benign tumor forms in one of your parathyroid glands or you develop another condition that leads these glands to produce more parathyroid hormone. Removing the growth from the gland stops the formation of kidney stones. Or your doctor may recommend treatment of the condition that's causing your parathyroid gland to overproduce the hormone.</p>


-----------------URINARY TRACT INFECTION ( UTI ) -----------------------

<p><strong>Summary:-</strong></p><p>A urinary tract infection (UTI) also called Bladder Infection is an infection in any part of your urinary system. Most infections involve the lower urinary tract the bladder and the urethra. Women are at greater risk of developing a UTI than are men. Infection limited to your bladder can be painful and annoying. However, serious consequences can occur if a UTI spreads to your kidneys. A bladder infection may cause pelvic pain, increased urge to urinate, pain with urination, and blood in the urine.</p><p>UTIs are usually classified as upper or lower according to where they occur along the urinary tract,</p><ul><li>Lower UTIs: Infections of the bladder (cystitis)</li><li>Upper UTIs: Infections of the kidneys (pyelonephritis)</li></ul><p><strong>Causes</strong><strong>:-</strong></p><p>Urinary tract infections typically occur when bacteria enter the urinary tract through the urethra and begin to multiply in the bladder. Women with diabetes may be at higher risk because their weakened immune systems make them less able to fight off infections.&nbsp;</p><p>The most common UTIs occur mainly in women and affect the bladder and urethra.</p><ul><li>Infection of the bladder (cystitis). This type of UTI is usually caused by Escherichia coli (E. coli), a type of bacteria commonly found in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. However, sometimes other bacteria are responsible.</li></ul><p>Sexual intercourse may lead to cystitis, but you don't have to be sexually active to develop it. All women are at risk of cystitis because of their anatomy specifically, the short distance from the urethra to the anus and the urethral opening to the bladder.</p><ul><li>Infection of the urethra (urethritis). This type of UTI can occur when GI bacteria spread from the anus to the urethra. Also, because the female urethra is close to the vagina, sexually transmitted infections, such as herpes, gonorrhea, chlamydia, and mycoplasma, can cause urethritis.</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:-</strong></p><p>Urinary tract infections don't always cause signs and symptoms, but when they do they may include:</p><ul><li>A strong, persistent urge to urinate</li><li>A burning sensation when urinating</li><li>Passing frequent, small amounts of urine</li><li>Urine that appears cloudy</li><li>Urine that appears red, bright pink or cola-colored a sign of blood in the urine</li><li>Strong-smelling urine</li><li>Pelvic pain, in women especially in the center of the pelvis and around the area of the pubic bone</li></ul>


<p><strong>TREATMENT:-</strong></p><ul><li>Drink plenty of liquids, especially water. Drinking water helps dilute your urine and ensures that you'll urinate more frequently &mdash; allowing bacteria to be flushed from your urinary tract before an infection can begin.</li><li>Drink cranberry juice. Although studies are not conclusive that cranberry juice prevents UTIs, it is likely not harmful.</li><li>Wipe from front to back. Doing so after urinating and after a bowel movement helps prevent bacteria in the anal region from spreading to the vagina and urethra.</li><li>Empty your bladder soon after intercourse. Also, drink a full glass of water to help flush bacteria.</li><li>Avoid potentially irritating feminine products. Using deodorant sprays or other feminine products, such as douches and powders, in the genital area can irritate the urethra.</li><li>Change your birth control method. Diaphragms, or unlubricated or spermicide-treated condoms, can all contribute to bacterial growth</li></ul>


--------------Acute  kidney Failure (injury) -----------------------------


<p><strong>Summary:-</strong></p><p>When your kidneys stop working suddenly, over a very short period of time it is called acute kidney Failure or Acute Kidney failure or Acute Renal failure. It is very serious and requires immediate treatment. Acute kidney failure occurs when your kidneys suddenly become unable to filter waste products from your blood. When your kidneys lose their filtering ability, dangerous levels of wastes may accumulate, and your blood's chemical makeup may get out of balance. Acute kidney failure is most common in people who are already hospitalized, particularly in critically ill people who need intensive care. Acute kidney failure can be fatal and requires intensive treatment. However, acute kidney failure may be reversible. If you're otherwise in good health, you may recover normal or nearly normal kidney function.</p><p><strong>CAUSES:-</strong></p><p>Acute kidney Failure usually happens when your kidneys are damaged suddenly. The damage that leads to failure may be caused by:</p><ul><li>Not enough blood flowing through your kidneys</li><li>An injury directly to your kidneys or a problem with your kidneys</li><li>A blockage in your ureters, the tubes that take urine from your kidneys to your bladder</li><li>Low blood pressure</li><li>Bleeding too much</li><li>Having severe diarrhea</li><li>Heart disease or heart attack</li><li>Infection</li><li>Liver failure</li><li>Being very dehydrated (not having enough fluid in your body)</li><li>Severe allergic reaction</li><li>Blood clots in or around the kidneys</li><li>Alcohol or drug abuse</li><li>Some blood or blood vessel disorders</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:-</strong></p><ul><li>Decreased urine output, although occasionally urine output remains normal</li><li>Fluid retention, causing swelling in your legs, ankles or feet</li><li>Shortness of breath</li><li>Fatigue</li><li>Confusion</li><li>Nausea</li><li>Weakness</li><li>Irregular heartbeat</li><li>Chest pain or pressure</li><li>Seizures or coma in severe cases</li></ul>


<p><strong>Treatment:-</strong></p><p>Treatment depends on the type of kidney failure whereas most common treatment is</p><h3>&nbsp;Diet:-</h3><p>Your doctor will restrict your diet and the number of liquids you eat and drink. This will reduce the buildup of toxins that the kidneys would normally eliminate. A diet high in carbohydrates and low in protein, salt, and potassium is usually recommended.</p><h3><strong>Medications:-</strong></h3><p>Your doctor may prescribe antibiotics to treat or prevent any infections that occur at the same time. Diuretics may help your kidneys eliminate fluid. Calcium and insulin can help you avoid dangerous increases in your blood potassium levels.</p><h3><strong>Dialysis:-</strong></h3><p>You may need dialysis, but it&rsquo;s not always necessary, and it will likely only be temporary. Dialysis involves diverting blood out of your body into a machine that filters out waste. The clean blood then returns to your body. If your potassium levels are dangerously high, dialysis can save your life. Dialysis is necessary if there are changes in your mental status or if you stop urinating. You may also need dialysis if you develop pericarditis or inflammation of the heart. Dialysis can help eliminate nitrogen waste products from your body.</p>


-----------------------------Neurological Diseases:----------------------
--------------------------Autism------------------------------------

<p><strong>Summary:</strong></p><p>Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a complicated condition including problems with communication and behavior. It refers to a broad range of challenges of social skills, repetitive behaviors, speech, and nonverbal communication.&nbsp;</p><p>It is defined by a certain set of behaviors and is a &ldquo;spectrum condition&rdquo; and each person with autism has a distinct set of strengths and challenges.</p><p>Being a neurological and developmental disorder, autism begins in early childhood and lasts throughout a person's life. The symptoms generally appear in the first two years of in-person life.&nbsp;</p><p>Treatments and therapies can improve symptoms and the ability to function to live a normal life.</p><p>Boys are about four times more likely to develop autism spectrum disorder than girls are.</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong>&nbsp;</p><p>Autism is complex and no two people with autism are exactly the same. So, there are probably many causes of autism. It is also likely that there is not a single cause for autism, rather, it is a result of a combination of causes.</p><ul><li>Autism runs in families, so certain combinations of genes may increase a child&rsquo;s risk.</li><li>Children born to older parents are at greater risk for having Autism</li><li>Exposure to air pollution during pregnancy especially heavy metals and particulates&nbsp;</li><li>A maternal metabolic condition such as diabetes and obesity</li><li>Problems with growth or overgrowth in certain areas of the brain.</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>Autism symptoms are noticeable during early childhood, between 12 and 24 months of age. However, symptoms may also appear earlier or later. The common thread is differences in social skills, communication, and behavior compared with people who aren&rsquo;t on the spectrum.</p><p>Social skills :</p><p>&nbsp;Children or adults with autism may not understand or appropriately use spoken language, gestures, eye contact, facial expressions. Other social skills may include an abnormal tone of voice, avoids physical contact, and prefers to be alone.</p><p>Communication:&nbsp;</p><p>About 40% of kids with autism spectrum disorders don&rsquo;t talk at all, and between 25% and 30% develop some language skills during infancy but then lose them later.&nbsp;</p><p>Delayed speech and language skill, repeating words or phrases, less responsive, mix up pronouns, Flat, robotic speaking voice, or singsong voice.</p><p>Patterns of behavior:&nbsp;</p><p>Patterns of behavior vary greatly across the autism spectrum. They can include: Repetitive body movements, get upset by minor changes, Staring at lights or spinning objects, fixated interests or preoccupations, and fussy eating habits.</p><p><strong>Diagnosis:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Early diagnosis can make a huge difference in the lives of children with autism and their families.</p><p>A diagnosis ultimately made based on your description of your child's development, plus careful observations of certain behaviors by your pediatrician, autism experts, medical tests, and your child's history.</p><p>As there isn't a specific medical test to determine the disorder, autism specialist may:</p><ul><li>tests covering hearing, speech, language, developmental level, and social and behavioral issues</li><li>Recommend genetic testing to identify whether your child has a genetic disorder</li><li>Observe your child's social interactions, communication skills and behavior have developed and changed over time</li></ul><p>If your child needs more tests, you will be guided to a team of ASD specialists - child psychologist, speech-language pathologist, and occupational therapist.&nbsp;</p>

<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>There has been no treatment shown to cure autism, but several interventions have been developed and studied for use with young children. The type of treatment your child receives for autism depends on his individual needs.</p><p>These interventions may reduce symptoms, improve cognitive ability and daily living skills, and maximize the ability of the child to function and participate in the community.</p><p>The types of therapies can be broken down as below:</p><ul><li>Behavior and Communication Approaches</li><li>Dietary Approaches</li><li>Medication</li><li>Complementary and Alternative Medicine</li></ul><p>Parent&rsquo;s guide:</p><h3>Being emotionally strong allows you to be the best parent you can be to your child in need. Here are a few tips for the parents:</h3><ul><li>Be consistent in teaching your child as it is a hard time applying what they have learned.</li><li>Stick to a schedule or routine</li><li>Make an effort to catch them doing something and reward their good behavior</li><li>Carve out a private space in your home to create a safety zone</li><li>Find non-verbal ways to connect to your child</li><li>Pay attention to your child's sensory sensitivities</li><li>Create a personalized autism treatment plan with the guidance of your doctor</li><li>Find the help of support groups in your locality or community</li></ul>



--------------------ALS-----------------------


<p><strong>Summary:</strong></p><p>Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a group of rare neurological diseases that involves nerve cells (neurons) in the brain and spinal cord responsible for controlling voluntary muscle movement like chewing, walking, and talking.&nbsp;</p><p>&nbsp;A-myo-trophic comes from the Greek language. "A" means no. "Myo" refers to muscle, and "Trophic" means nourishment &ndash; "No muscle nourishment."</p><p>Neurons reach from the brain to the spinal cord and from the spinal cord to the muscles throughout the body. The progressive degeneration of the neurons in ALS eventually leads to their demise or wastes away. There are two different types of ALS, sporadic and familial. Sporadic seems to occur at random with no clearly associated risk factors and no family history of the disease. About 5 to 10 percent of all ALS cases are familial, which means that an individual inherits the disease from his or her parents. ALS usually strikes people between the ages of 40 and 70.</p><p><strong>Causes:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Researchers still don't know exactly what causes motor neurons to die with ALS. Gene changes, or mutations, are behind 5% to 10% of ALS cases. More than 12 different gene changes have been linked to ALS.</p><ul><li>Five to 10 percent of the people with ALS inherited it (familial ALS).</li><li>Environmental factors like smoking, exposure to certain metals or chemicals, traumatic injuries, viral infections, and intense exertion.</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>The initial symptoms of ALS can be quite varied in different people. One person may have trouble grasping a pen or lifting a coffee cup, while another person may experience a change in vocal pitch when speaking. ALS is typically a disease that involves a gradual onset.</p><p>Some early symptoms include stumbling, holding items, slurred speech, swallowing problems, muscle cramps, muscle stiffness and twitching in arm, leg, shoulder or tongue.</p><p>As ALS gets worse, more muscles and activities are affected. Among the more advanced signs of the disease are weaker muscles, less muscle mass, trouble breathing, more serious chewing and swallowing problems.&nbsp;</p><p><strong>Diagnosis:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>There is no one test or procedure to ultimately establish the diagnosis of ALS. It is through a clinical examination and series of diagnostic tests, often ruling out other diseases that mimic ALSTests to rule out other conditions might include Physical Exam, Blood &amp; Urine test, spinal tap or lumbar puncture, MRI, Muscle &amp; Nerve test like EMG &amp; Biopsy of muscle.</p>

<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>Treatments can't reverse the damage of ALS, but they can slow the progression of symptoms, prevent complications, and make you more comfortable and independent. Use of approved medications and supportive therapies to help the patient manage the symptoms associated with the disease more effectively.</p><p>Medicines: Rilutek &amp; Radicava are given to increase life expectancy and other medicines are advised for the symptoms like cramps, pain, sleeping problems, fatigue &amp; constipation.</p><p>Therapies like breathing care, physical, occupational &amp; speech, nutritional, Psychological and social support.</p><p>Tips for coping with ALS:</p><ul><li>Take time to grieve</li><li>Be hopeful</li><li>Think beyond the physical changes</li><li>Get comfortable asking for help</li><li>Join a support group</li><li>Maintaining an optimistic outlook</li></ul>

----------------ALZHEIMER: ------------------------


<p><strong>Overview :</strong></p><p>Alzheimer&rsquo;s disease is an irreversible, progressive brain disorder that slowly destroys memory and thinking skills. It involves parts of the brain that control thought, memory, and language and can seriously affect a person&rsquo;s ability to carry out daily activities. Symptoms usually develop slowly and get worse over time, becoming severe enough to interfere with daily tasks.&nbsp;</p><p>Alzheimer's disease accounts for 60 percent to 80 percent of dementia cases.</p><p>With late-stage Alzheimer's, individuals lose the ability to carry on a conversation and respond to their environment. It seems likely that changes in the brain may begin a decade or more before memory and other cognitive problems appear.&nbsp;</p><p><strong>Causes:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Alzheimer's disease is thought to be caused by the abnormal build-up of proteins in and around brain cells. So far, research has linked the disease with:</p><ul><li>Age: Your risk for Alzheimer's goes up as you get older. For most people, it starts going up after age 65.</li><li>Gender: Women get the disease more often than men.</li><li>Family history: People who have a parent or sibling with Alzheimer&rsquo;s are more likely to get it themselves.</li><li>Down syndrome: It&rsquo;s not clear why, but people with this disorder often get Alzheimer's disease in their 30s and 40s.</li><li>Head injury: Some studies have shown a link between Alzheimer's disease and a major head injury.</li><li>Other factors: High cholesterol levels and high blood pressure may also raise your risk.</li></ul>


<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>It might start when someone has trouble recalling things that just happened or putting thoughts into words. But over time, the problems get worse. There are three main phases of Alzheimer's: mild, moderate, and severe. Each stage has its own set of symptoms.</p><p>Mild Alzheimer's: Less energy, less social activities, Loss of recent memories, Language problems, coordination problems, hard time with everyday tasks, Mood swings, getting lost on familiar routes</p><p>Moderate Alzheimer's: Rambling speech, hard time planning or solving problems, Using the right words, Confusion about time or place, Getting angry or upset easily, Trouble sleeping, Delusions, Wandering.</p><p>Severe Alzheimer's: Can&rsquo;t express themselves, remember, or process information, problems with swallowing and control of their bladder and bowels, extreme mood swings, hallucinations, can&rsquo;t move easily on their own.</p><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong>&nbsp;</p><p>Doctors use several methods and tools to help determine whether a person who is having memory problems has &ldquo;possible Alzheimer&rsquo;s dementia&rdquo;</p><ul><li><p>Assessing memory problems and other symptoms by Mental status testing, Neuropsychological tests, Interviews with friends and family.</p></li><li><p>Laboratory tests such as a thyroid disorder or vitamin B-12 deficiency.</p></li><li><p>Brain-imaging tests most often used are Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), Computerized tomography (CT), Positron emission tomography (PET)</p></li><li>Medical history of your health care provider will review your medical history, including psychiatric history and history of cognitive and behavioral changes. He or she will want to know about any current and past illnesses, as well as any medications you are taking.&nbsp;</li></ul>

<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>There is no cure for Alzheimer's disease. Once a person starts showing signs &ndash; memory loss and problems with learning, judgment, communication, and daily life -- there aren&rsquo;t any treatments that can stop or reverse them. But there are medicines that can ease some of the symptoms in some people.</p><ul><li><p>Drug therapy: A number of medicines may be prescribed for Alzheimer's disease to help temporarily improve some symptoms like memory, cognitive changes, behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD).</p></li></ul><ul><li><p>Safe and supportive environment: Always keep keys, wallets, mobile phones, and other valuables in the same place at home, so they don't become lost. Keep medications in a secure location. Use a daily checklist to keep track of dosages. Use a calendar or whiteboard in the home to track daily schedules. Keep photographs and other meaningful objects around the house.</p></li><li><p>Treatments that involve therapies and activities like Cognitive stimulation therapy, Cognitive rehabilitation, Reminiscence and life story work</p></li></ul><p><strong>Prevent Alzheimer's disease:</strong></p><p>By identifying and controlling your personal risk factors and leading a brain-healthy lifestyle, you can maximize your chances of lifelong brain health and preserve your cognitive abilities. These steps may prevent the symptoms of Alzheimer&rsquo;s disease and slow down the process of deterioration.</p><ul><li>Exercise</li><li>Eat a Mediterranean diet</li><li>Get enough sleep</li><li>Learn new things</li><li>Connect socially</li><li>Stress management</li><li>Vascular health</li></ul>


---------------Stroke: ----------------------------------


<p>Overview:</p><p>A stroke occurs when a blood vessel in the brain ruptures and bleeds, or when there&rsquo;s a blockage in the blood supply to the brain. The rupture or blockage prevents blood and oxygen from reaching the brain&rsquo;s tissues. Without oxygen, brain cells and tissue become damaged and begin to die within minutes.</p><p>In fact, nearly 800,000 people have a stroke each year. That equates to around one person every 40 seconds.</p><p>Stroke is the No. 5 cause of death and a leading cause of disability in the United States.</p><p>There are three main types of stroke:</p><ul><li>Ischemic stroke: A blood clot prevents blood and oxygen from reaching an area of the brain.</li><li>Hemorrhagic stroke: This occurs when a blood vessel ruptures.&nbsp;</li><li>Transient ischemic attack (TIA): This occurs when blood flow to a part of the brain is inadequate for a brief period of time.&nbsp;</li></ul><h3>Causes:</h3><p>You can treat some conditions that make you more likely to have a stroke. Other things that put you at risk can't be changed:</p><p><strong> Lifestyle risk factors:</strong></p><ul><li>An unhealthy diet that includes salt, saturated fat, trans fats, cholesterol</li><li>Inactivity, or lack of exercise</li><li>Heavy or binge drinking</li><li>Use of illegal drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamine</li><li>Tobacco use</li></ul><p><strong> Medical risk factors:</strong></p><ul><li>a previous stroke or TIA</li><li>high blood pressure</li><li>high cholesterol</li><li>sleep apnea</li><li>Personal or family history of stroke</li><li>Diabetes</li></ul><p>80 percent of strokes are preventable.</p>


<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>The range and severity of early stroke symptoms vary considerably, but they share the common characteristic of being sudden. Warning signs may include some or all of the following symptoms:</p><ul><li>Sudden numbness or weakness of the face, arm, or leg</li><li>Dizziness, nausea or vomiting</li><li>confusion, trouble speaking, or understanding speech</li><li>Loss of vision or difficulty seeing</li><li>Unusually severe headache</li><li>loss of balance or coordination</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>Things will move quickly once you get to the hospital, as your emergency team tries to determine what type of stroke you're having. A number of tests can be done to confirm the diagnosis and determine the cause of the stroke-like blood test, pulse, Clotting time, and measure blood pressure.</p><ul><li>Computerized tomography (CT) scan</li><li>Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).</li><li>Swallow tests</li><li>Carotid ultrasound</li><li>Echocardiography</li><li>Cerebral angiogram</li></ul><p>According to the CDC, 87 percent of strokes are ischemic strokes.</p>


<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>Treatment depends on the type of stroke: ischemic or hemorrhagic.</p><p>Ischemic stroke: treatment of Ischemic stroke focuses on restoring blood flow to the brain.</p><ul><li>clot-dissolving medicine: You may get a clot-dissolving medicine called tissue plasminogen activator (TPA). This medicine can improve recovery from a stroke. Doctors try to give this medicine within 3 hours after symptoms start.</li><li>Thrombectomy: The doctor uses a thin, flexible tube (catheter) and a tiny cage to remove the blood clot that caused the stroke</li><li>Surgery: In the rare instances that other treatments don&rsquo;t work, your doctor may perform surgery to remove a blood clot and plaques from your arteries</li></ul><p>Hemorrhagic stroke:</p><p>For this type of stroke, treatment focuses on controlling bleeding, reducing the pressure in the brain, and stabilizing vital signs, especially blood pressure.</p><ul><li>Medications: The treatment goal is to make your blood clot. Therefore, you may be given medication to counteract any blood thinners you take.In some cases, medicines may be given to control blood pressure, brain swelling, blood sugar levels, fever, and seizures.</li><li>Coiling: your doctor guides a long tube to the area of hemorrhage or weakened blood vessels. They then install a coil-like device in the area where the artery wall is weak. This blocks blood flow to the area, reducing bleeding.</li><li>Surgery: If a large amount of bleeding has occurred and symptoms are quickly getting worse, you may need surgery. The surgery can remove the blood that has built up inside the brain and lower pressure inside the head.</li></ul><p><br /><br /></p><p>How to prevent a stroke?</p><p>Like close cousins, heart disease and stroke share a common lineage. Guidelines on the prevention of stroke suggest that a healthy lifestyle can cut the risk of having one by 80%. No drug, device, or other intervention can come close to doing that.</p><ul><li>Know and control your blood pressure.</li><li>Don't smoke</li><li>Lose weight if you are obese.</li><li>Become more active.</li><li>Know and control your blood sugar and cholesterol.</li><li>If you drink alcohol, do so in moderation.</li><li>Adopt a healthy diet low in sodium and rich in potassium.</li><li>Know the warning signs of stroke and respond immediately.</li><li>Manage your stress levels</li></ul>


--------------------Vertigo: ----------------------------


<p><strong>Summary :&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Vertigo is a sensation of spinning dizziness, as though the room or surrounding environment is spinning in circles around the person. Many people use the term to describe a fear of heights, but this is not correct. This feeling may be barely noticeable, or it may be so severe that you find it difficult to keep your balance and do everyday tasks. Attacks of vertigo can develop suddenly and last for a few seconds, or they may last much longer. If you have severe vertigo, your symptoms may be constant and last for several days, making normal life very difficult. Migraines sometimes cause vertigo.&nbsp;</p><p>Vertigo is a symptom, not a disease.</p><p><strong>Causes: </strong></p><p>Conditions that can lead to vertigo include the following:</p><ul><li>benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) &ndash; where certain head movements trigger vertigo</li><li>migraines &ndash; severe headaches</li><li>labyrinthitis &ndash; an inner ear infection</li><li>vestibular neuronitis &ndash; inflammation of the vestibular nerve, which runs into the inner ear and sends messages to the brain that help to control balance.</li><li>Head or neck injury</li><li>Brain problems such as stroke or tumor</li></ul>

<h3>Symptoms of Vertigo:</h3><p>Vertigo is often triggered by a change in the position of your head. People with vertigo typically describe it as feeling like they are:</p><ul><li>balance problems</li><li>lightheadedness</li><li>a sense of motion sickness</li><li>nausea and vomiting</li><li>Spinning</li><li>Tilting</li><li>Swaying</li><li>ringing in the ear called tinnitus</li><li>a feeling of fullness in the ear</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>Your doctor may do a series of tests to determine the cause of your dizziness.&nbsp;</p><p><strong>Physical examination</strong>: During a physical examination, your doctor will likely look for:</p><ul><li>Signs and symptoms of dizziness that are prompted by eye or head movements</li><li>Dizziness with specific eye movements that occur when you lie on your back with your head turned to one side and tipped slightly over the edge of the examination bed</li><li>Involuntary movements of your eyes from side to side&nbsp;</li><li>Inability to control your eye movements</li></ul><p>If the cause of your signs and symptoms is difficult to determine, your doctor may order additional testing, such as:</p><ul><li><strong>Electronystagmography (ENG) or videonystagmography (VNG)</strong></li><li><strong>Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).</strong></li></ul>


<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>Most cases of vertigo get better without treatment. This is because your brain is able to adapt, at least in part, to the inner ear changes, relying on other mechanisms to maintain balance.</p><p>For some, treatment is needed and may include:</p><ul><li>Physical therapy: This is aimed at helping strengthen the vestibular system. The function of the vestibular system is to send signals to the brain about head and body movements relative to gravity. It helps train your other senses to compensate for vertigo.</li><li>special exercises: The movements are done to move the calcium deposits out of the canal into an inner ear chamber so they can be absorbed by the body. A doctor or physical therapist can guide you through the movements. The movements are safe and often effective.</li><li>Medicine: In some cases, medication may be given to relieve symptoms such as nausea or motion sickness associated with vertigo. If vertigo is caused by an infection or inflammation, antibiotics or steroids may reduce swelling and cure an infection.</li><li>Surgery: If vertigo is caused by a more serious problem, such as a tumor or injury to the brain or neck, surgery for those problems may help to alleviate vertigo.</li></ul><p><strong>Home Remedies:</strong></p><p>Some people with vertigo claim that natural or home-based therapies can improve the spinning and dizzy sensations they feel. You should only try home remedies if your doctor gives you the go-ahead.</p><p><strong>Repositioning Exercises</strong>: Some techniques that are used to reposition crystals in your inner ear can be done at home. Your healthcare provider will give you step-by-step instructions on how to effectively perform these exercises. These are as follows: Epley Maneuver, Semont-Toupet maneuver, Brandt-Daroff exercise, Gingko Biloba.</p><p><strong>Dietary Changes</strong>: Common culprits that could aggravate vertigo in certain people include Salty foods, Sugary foods, Alcohol, Caffeine. People with migraine-associated vertigo may also need to avoid trigger foods that contain the amino acid tyramine. These may include Smoked meats, Yogurt, Chocolate, Bananas, Ripened cheeses, Nuts, Citrus fruits, Chicken liver, Red wine.</p><p><strong>Hydration:</strong> Plan to drink extra water during times you tend to become dehydrated. You might find that simply being aware of how much water you&rsquo;re drinking helps decrease vertigo episodes.</p><p><strong>Acupressure:&nbsp;</strong>Acupressure applies the same concepts as acupuncture, but it is without the needles. The goal of acupressure is to promote wellness and relaxation. It can help manage vertigo by stimulating pressure points throughout the body. One common method, called the P6 acupressure method, involves an effective pressure point located in the two tendons between the inner forearm and the wrist.</p>


----------------Parkinson's Disease: -----------------------


<p><strong>Overview :&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Parkinson&rsquo;s disease is a progressive neurological disorder. The first signs are problems with movement. Symptoms start gradually, sometimes starting with a barely noticeable tremor in just one hand. Over time, other symptoms develop, and some people will have dementia. Most of the symptoms result from a fall in dopamine levels in the brain.&nbsp;</p><p>The first step to living well with Parkinson&rsquo;s disease is to understand the disease and the progression.&nbsp;</p><p>In the early stages of Parkinson's disease, your face may show little or no expression. Your arms may not swing when you walk. Your speech may become soft or slurred. Parkinson's disease symptoms worsen as your condition progresses over time.&nbsp;</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>Scientists are not sure what causes Parkinson&rsquo;s disease. It happens when nerve cells die in the brain. Several factors appear to play a role, including:</p><ul><li><strong>Your genes:</strong> Researchers have identified specific genetic mutations that can cause Parkinson's disease. But these are uncommon except in rare cases with many family members affected by Parkinson's disease.</li><li><strong>Environmental triggers:</strong> Exposure to certain toxins or environmental factors may increase the risk of later Parkinson's disease, but the risk is relatively small.</li><li><strong>Low dopamine levels:</strong> Dopamine plays a role in sending messages to the part of the brain that controls movement and coordination. Low dopamine levels can make it harder for people to control their movements. As dopamine levels fall in a person with Parkinson&rsquo;s disease, their symptoms gradually become more severe.</li><li><strong>Low norepinephrine levels: </strong>Norepinephrine is important for controlling many automatic body functions, such as the circulation of the blood. In Parkinson&rsquo;s disease, the nerve endings that produce this Norepinephrine die. This may explain why people with Parkinson&rsquo;s disease experience not only movement problems but also fatigue, constipation, and orthostatic hypotension, when blood pressure changes on standing up, leading to light-headedness.</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>Parkinson's disease signs and symptoms can be different for everyone. Early signs may be mild and go unnoticed. Symptoms often begin on one side of your body and usually remain worse on that side, even after symptoms begin to affect both sides. These earliest signs include:&nbsp;</p><ul><li>decreased ability to smell (anosmia)</li><li>constipation</li><li>small, cramped handwriting</li><li>voice changes</li><li>stooped posture</li><li>tremor (shaking that occurs at rest)</li><li>slow movements</li><li>stiffness of arms, legs, and trunk</li><li>problems with balance and tendency to fall</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>Many people think that the early signs of Parkinson&rsquo;s are normal signs of aging. For this reason, they may not seek help. However, treatment is more likely to be effective if a person takes it early in the development of Parkinson&rsquo;s disease. For this reason, it is important to get an early diagnosis if possible. Making an accurate diagnosis of Parkinson&rsquo;s disease can be complicated. Doctors must carefully weigh symptoms, family history, and other factors to come to a conclusion.</p><p>Your doctor may order lab tests, such as blood tests, to rule out other conditions that may be causing your symptoms.</p><p>Imaging tests, such as a CAT scan or MRI, may be used to rule out other conditions. A dopamine transporter (DAT) scan may also be used. While these tests don&rsquo;t confirm Parkinson&rsquo;s, they can help rule out other conditions and support the doctor&rsquo;s diagnosis.</p>

<p><strong>Treatment: </strong></p><p>Parkinson's disease can't be cured, but medications can help control your symptoms, often dramatically. Adequate rest, exercise, and a balanced diet are important. Speech therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy can also help to improve communication and self-care.</p><p><strong>Medications: </strong>Medications may help you manage problems with walking, movement, and tremor. These medications increase or substitute for dopamine</p><p><strong>Surgery:</strong> Surgical interventions are reserved for people who don&rsquo;t respond to medication, therapy, and lifestyle changes. Two primary types of surgery are used to treat Parkinson&rsquo;s:</p><ul><li><p><strong>Deep brain stimulation:</strong> Surgeons implant electrodes in specific parts of the brain. A generator connected to the electrodes sends out pulses to help reduce symptoms.</p></li><li><p><strong>Pump-delivered therapy:</strong> In order to use the pump, your doctor will have to perform a surgical procedure to place the pump near the small intestine.</p></li></ul><p><strong>Lifestyle and home remedies:</strong></p><ul><li><strong>Healthy eating:&nbsp;</strong>Parkinson&rsquo;s is the result of decreased dopamine levels in the brain. You may be able to increase levels of the hormone naturally with food. a healthy diet that focuses on specific nutrients may be able to reduce some symptoms and prevent progression of the disease. These foods include Antioxidant-rich foods, Fava beans, &nbsp;omega-3 fatty acids.</li><li><p><strong>Exercise: </strong>Exercising may increase your muscle strength, flexibility, and balance. It can also improve your well-being and reduce depression or anxiety. Your doctor may suggest you work with a physical therapist to learn an exercise program that works for you. You may also try exercises such as walking, swimming, gardening, dancing, water aerobics, or stretching.</p></li><li><p><strong>Yoga</strong>: Yoga uses targeted muscle movement to build muscle, increase mobility, and improve flexibility. People with Parkinson&rsquo;s may notice yoga even helps control tremors in some affected limbs.</p></li></ul>


---------------------MIGRANE---------------------------

<p><strong>Overview :</strong></p><p>Migraine is a neurological condition that can cause multiple symptoms. It&rsquo;s frequently characterized by intense, debilitating headaches, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and extreme sensitivity to light and sound. Migraine attacks can last for hours to days, and the pain can be so severe that it interferes with your daily activities. A migraine headache is the result of specific physiologic changes that occur within the brain,</p><p>According to the American Migraine Association, they affect 36 million Americans or approximately 12 percent of the population.</p><p>Migraines can follow an aura of sensory disturbances followed by a severe headache that often appears on one side of the head. They tend to affect people aged 15 to 55 years.</p><p>In some cases, people with migraines have specific warning symptoms, or an aura, prior to the onset of their headache. These warning signs can range from flashing lights or a blind spot in one eye to numbness or weakness involving one side of the body.</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>Researchers haven&rsquo;t identified a definitive cause for migraines. However, they have found some contributing factors that can trigger the condition. Changes in the brainstem and its interactions with the trigeminal nerve, a major pain pathway, might be involved. Some research suggests there could be a heredity factor for migraines, meaning they may run in families.</p><p>&nbsp;Migraine triggers:&nbsp;</p><ul><li>Hormonal changes in women</li><li>Hormonal medications</li><li>Alcohol Drinks</li><li>Stress at work or home&nbsp;</li><li>Sensory stimuli</li><li>Sleep changes</li><li>Physical factors</li><li>Weather changes</li><li>Foods</li><li>Food additives</li><li>Changes in barometric pressure</li><li>dehydration</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>Symptoms of migraines can start a while before the headache, immediately before the headache, during the headache, and after the headache.&nbsp;</p><h3><strong>Prodrome</strong></h3><p>One or two days before a migraine, you might notice subtle changes that warn of an upcoming migraine, including:</p><ul><li>Constipation</li><li>Mood changes, from depression to euphoria</li><li>Food cravings</li><li>Neck stiffness</li><li>Increased thirst and urination</li><li>Frequent yawning</li></ul><p><strong>Attack</strong></p><p>A migraine usually lasts from 4 to 72 hours if untreated. How often migraines occur varies from person to person. Migraines might occur rarely or strike several times a month.</p><p>During a migraine, you might have:</p><ul><li>The pain usually on one side of your head, but often on both sides</li><li>Pain that throbs or pulses</li><li>Sensitivity to light, sound, and sometimes smell and touch</li><li>Nausea and vomiting</li></ul><h3><strong>Post-drome:</strong></h3><p>After a migraine attack, you might feel drained, confused, and washed out for up to a day. Some people report feeling elated. The sudden head movement might bring on the pain again briefly.</p><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>If you have migraines or a family history of migraines, a neurologist will likely diagnose migraines based on your medical history, symptoms, and a physical and neurological examination. Your doctor might want to do blood tests or imaging tests, such as an MRI or CAT scan of the brain. These tests can help ensure there are no other causes for the headache. You may also be asked to keep a headache journal. This can help your doctor identify the things that might cause your migraines.</p>


<p><strong>Treatment:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>There is currently no single cure for migraines. Treatment is aimed at preventing a full-blown attack and alleviating the symptoms that occur. Many medications have been designed to treat migraines. Medications used to combat migraines fall into two broad categories:</p><ul><li><strong>Abortive:&nbsp;</strong>These types of drugs are taken during migraine attacks and are designed to stop symptoms.</li><li><strong>Preventive:&nbsp;</strong>These types of drugs are taken regularly, often daily, to reduce the severity or frequency of migraines.</li></ul><p>Your treatment choices depend on the frequency and severity of your headaches, whether you have nausea and vomiting with your headaches, how disabling your headaches are, and other medical conditions you have.</p><p><strong>Lifestyle with Migraine:</strong></p><p>Migraine patients can play a significant role in managing their headache frequency and severity. Keep track of when migraines occur by using a headache diary or log to track pain levels, triggers, and symptoms. When symptoms of migraine start, try heading to a quiet, darkened room. Close your eyes and rest or take a nap. Place a cool cloth or ice pack wrapped in a towel or cloth on your forehead or at the back of your neck. lifestyle modifications can lessen their impact:&nbsp;</p><ul><li>Develop a sleeping and eating routine. Don't sleep too much or too little. Set and follow a consistent sleep and wake schedule daily. Try to eat meals at the same time every day.</li><li>Drink plenty of fluids. Staying hydrated, particularly with water, might help.</li><li>Keep a headache diary. Continue recording in your headache diary even after you see your doctor. It will help you learn more about what triggers your migraines and what treatment is most effective.</li><li>Exercise regularly</li></ul>

-------------------------------------------INFECTIOUS DISEASE-----------------------
-----------------------CHOLERA-------------------------
<p><strong>Infectious Disease:</strong></p><p><strong>Cholera:</strong></p><p>Cholera is a disease caused by bacteria that produce watery diarrhea that can rapidly lead to dehydration. The disease is typically spread through contaminated water. In severe cases, immediate treatment is necessary because death can occur within hours. This can happen even if you were healthy before you caught it.&nbsp;</p><p>It is caused by the bacterium <em>Vibrio cholera (V. cholera)</em>. These bacteria were discovered in 1883. <em>V. cholera</em> bacteria live in shallow, salty water on microscopic crustaceans. They can also exist as colonies of biofilms that coat the surface of the water, plants, stones, shells, and similar items, and they can live among the eggs of midges, which serve as a reservoir for cholera bacteria.</p><p>Due to severe dehydration, fatality rates are high when untreated, especially among children and infants. Cholera was prevalent in the United States in the 1800s, but now it is rare because there are well-developed sanitary systems and living conditions. When traveling to Asia, Africa and some parts of Latin America, however, people need to protect themselves against cholera by having the appropriate vaccinations beforehand.</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>A bacterium called Vibrio cholerae causes cholera infection. The deadly effects of the disease are the result of a toxin the bacteria produces in the small intestine. The toxin causes the body to secrete enormous amounts of water, leading to diarrhea and a rapid loss of fluids and salts (electrolytes).&nbsp;</p><p>Contaminated water supplies are the primary source of cholera infection. Uncooked fruits, vegetables, and other foods can also contain the bacteria that cause cholera. It does not usually pass from person to person through casual contact.</p><p>Risk factors for cholera include Poor sanitary conditions, Reduced or nonexistent stomach acid, Household exposure, people with type O blood, Raw or undercooked shellfish.</p>


<p><strong>Signs &amp; Symptoms:</strong></p><p>Most people exposed to the cholera bacterium (Vibrio cholerae) don't become ill and don't know they've been infected. But because they shed cholera bacteria in their stool for seven to 14 days, they can still infect others through contaminated water.</p><ul><li>Watery diarrhea (sometimes in large volumes)</li><li>Rice-water stools (see figure 1)</li><li>Fishy odor to stools</li><li>Vomiting</li><li>Rapid heart rate</li><li>Loss of skin elasticity</li><li>Dry mucous membranes (dry mouth)</li><li>Low blood pressure</li><li>Thirst</li><li>Muscle cramps (leg cramps, for example)</li><li>Restlessness or irritability (especially in children)</li><li>Unusual sleepiness or tiredness</li></ul><p>Other symptoms that may occur, especially with more severe disease, include the following:</p><ul><li>Abdominal pain (cramps)</li><li>Rectal pain</li><li>Fever</li><li>Severe vomiting</li><li>Dehydration</li><li>Low or no urine output</li><li>Weight loss</li><li>Seizures</li><li>Shock</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>A doctor may suspect cholera if a patient has severe watery diarrhea, vomiting, and rapid dehydration, especially if they have recently traveled to a place that has a recent history of cholera, or poor sanitation, or if they have recently consumed shellfish. The only way to confirm a diagnosis is to identify the bacteria in a stool sample.&nbsp;</p><p>Rapid cholera dipstick tests enable doctors in remote areas to quickly confirm a cholera diagnosis. Quick confirmation helps to decrease death rates at the start of cholera outbreaks and leads to earlier public health interventions for outbreak control.</p>

<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>Severe cases of cholera require intravenous fluid replacement. An adult weighing 70 kilograms will need at least 7 liters of intravenous fluids.</p><ul><li>Rehydration: the most important treatment is to give oral hydration solution (ORS), also known as oral rehydration therapy (ORT).</li><li>The treatment consists of large volumes of water mixed with a blend of sugar and salts.</li><li>Antibiotics. While not a necessary part of cholera treatment, some antibiotics can reduce cholera-related diarrhea and shorten how long it lasts in severely ill people.</li><li>Zinc supplements. Research has shown that zinc might decrease diarrhea and shorten how long it lasts in children with cholera.</li><li>Intravenous fluids. Most people with cholera can be helped by oral rehydration alone, but severely dehydrated people might also need intravenous fluids.</li></ul><h2><strong>Prevention</strong></h2><p>Cholera is often spread through food and because of poor hygiene. Some simple measures can reduce the risk of contracting cholera.</p><p>When traveling in areas where the disease is endemic, it is important to:</p><ul><li>Eat only fruit you have peeled.</li><li>Avoid salads, raw fish, and uncooked vegetables.</li><li>Ensure that food is thoroughly cooked.</li><li>Make sure water is bottled or boiled and safe to consume.</li><li>Avoid street food, as this can carry cholera and other diseases.</li></ul><p>Individuals should seek medical attention immediately if they experience symptoms such as leg cramps, vomiting, and diarrhea while in a community where the disease exists.</p>


-------------------------------ZIKA VIRUS---------------------

<p>Zika Virus</p><p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>Zika virus infection is a mosquito-borne viral infection. It is spread by the <em>Aedes</em> species of mosquito, most commonly <em>Aedes aegypti</em> and <em>Aedes albopictus. Aedes</em> mosquitoes also transmit dengue and chikungunya viruses.&nbsp;</p><p>It primarily occurs in tropical and subtropical areas of the world. Most people infected with the Zika virus have no signs and symptoms, while others report mild fever, rash, and muscle pain. Other signs and symptoms may include headache, red eyes (conjunctivitis), and a general feeling of discomfort.</p><p>The virus causes birth defects in babies born to some infected pregnant women, including microcephaly, where babies are born with underdeveloped heads and brain damage.</p><p>Zika virus infections have been reported since the 1950s in parts of Africa and Asia, and in the Pacific islands in 2007. In 2015, the Zika virus spread to Central and South America.</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>When a mosquito bites a person infected with the Zika virus, the virus enters the mosquito. When the infected mosquito then bites another person, the virus enters that person's bloodstream. The virus can also spread to the fetus during pregnancy. Spread of the virus through sexual contact and blood transfusion have been reported.</p><p>Factors that put you at greater risk of developing the Zika virus include:</p><ul><li>Living or traveling in countries where there have been outbreaks.</li><li>Having unprotected sex</li><li>blood transfusions</li></ul>


<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>Only about 20% of persons infected with the Zika virus experience symptoms and the symptoms are usually mild. The symptoms last about 2 to 7 days and include:</p><ul><li>Fever</li><li>Rash</li><li>Headache</li><li>Joint pain</li><li>Conjunctivitis (red eyes)</li><li>Muscle pain</li></ul><p>&nbsp;Symptoms of Zika are similar to other viruses spread through mosquito bites, like dengue and chikungunya. Zika virus usually remains in the blood of an infected person for about a week. See your doctor or other healthcare providers if you develop symptoms and you live in or have recently traveled to an area with risk of Zika.&nbsp;</p><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>To diagnose Zika, a doctor or other healthcare provider will ask about any recent travel and any signs and symptoms. They may order blood or urine tests to help determine if you have Zika.</p><p>If you are pregnant with no symptoms of Zika virus infection with a history of recent travel to an area with active Zika virus transmission can be offered testing two to 12 weeks after her return.</p><p>Following positive, inconclusive, or negative test results, care providers may:</p><ul><li>Perform an ultrasound to detect microcephaly or other abnormalities of the brain</li><li>Offer to take a sample of amniotic fluid using a hollow needle inserted into the uterus (amniocentesis) to screen for Zika virus</li></ul>

<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>No specific antiviral treatment for the Zika virus exists. Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms with rest, fluids, and medications to relieve joint pain and fever. No vaccine exists to prevent the Zika virus. But several vaccines are currently in clinical trials.</p><ul><li>Get plenty of rest.</li><li>Drink fluids to prevent dehydration.</li><li>Take medicine to reduce fever and pain.</li><li>Do not take aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) until dengue can be ruled out to reduce the risk of bleeding.</li><li>If you are taking medicine for another medical condition, talk to your healthcare provider before taking additional medication.</li></ul><h2><strong>Connection Between Zika, Microcephaly, and Pregnancy:</strong></h2><p>Zika virus can be passed from a pregnant woman to her fetus. Infection during pregnancy can cause a birth defect called microcephaly and other severe fetal brain defects. It may also cause neurodevelopmental abnormalities like&nbsp;</p><ul><li>joints with limited range of motion</li><li>Seizures</li><li>too much muscle tone, restricting body movement</li><li>swallowing abnormalities</li><li>possible developmental delay</li><li>problems with hearing and vision</li></ul><p>The virus has caused panic in Brazil since it first appeared there in May 2015. More than 2,100 babies in Brazil have been born with microcephaly or other birth defects linked to Zika. At the time, Brazil and several other nations advised women to postpone pregnancy.</p>



----------------------------EBOLA------------------------------------

<p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>The Ebola virus disease (EVD), previously referred to as Ebola hemorrhagic fever, is a severe and often fatal infection. It is a serious and deadly virus transmitted by animals and humans. It was initially detected in 1976 in Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Researchers named the disease after the Ebola River. Until recently, Ebola appeared in Africa only.</p><p>Ebola is a rare but deadly virus that causes fever, body aches, and diarrhea, and sometimes bleeding inside and outside the body.</p><p>As the virus spreads through the body, it damages the immune system and organs. Ultimately, it causes levels of blood-clotting cells to drop. This leads to severe, uncontrollable bleeding. After entering the body, it kills cells, making some of them explode.</p><p><strong>It kills up to 90% of people who are infected</strong>.&nbsp;</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>&nbsp;Ebola isn&rsquo;t as contagious, it spreads to people by contact with the skin or bodily fluids of an infected animal, like a monkey, chimp, or fruit bat. Then it moves from person to person the same way. Those who care for a sick person or bury someone who has died from the disease often get it.</p><ul><li>Direct contact: Bodily fluids or secretions from infected people, such as blood, breast milk, semen, sweat, stool, urine, vomit</li><li>Burial ceremonies of someone who has died from Ebola</li><li>Exposure to infected objects, such as needles</li><li>Traveling to areas where a recent outbreak has occurred</li></ul>


<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>Early on, Ebola can feel like the flu or other illnesses. Symptoms show up 2 to 21 days after infection and usually include:</p><ul><li>fever,</li><li>fatigue, malaise, and weakness,</li><li>reddened eyes,</li><li>joint and muscle pain,</li><li>headache,</li><li>nausea and vomiting.</li></ul><p>Additional Ebola symptoms may include</p><ul><li>diarrhea,</li><li>stomach pain and loss of appetite,</li><li>cough, sore throat, and difficulty swallowing,</li><li>rash,</li><li>hiccups,</li><li>chest pain,</li><li>breathing problems.</li></ul><p>As the disease worsens in severity, symptoms can include bleeding at various sites within or outside of the body. <strong>30% to 50% of cases result in internal and external bleeding 4 to 5 days after the onset of symptoms.&nbsp;</strong></p><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>The early symptoms of Ebola can closely mimic other diseases like the flu, malaria, and typhoid fever. Doctors may test to rule out other diseases like cholera or malaria.</p><p>Blood tests can identify antibodies of the Ebola virus. Tests of tissues also can diagnose Ebola.If you have Ebola, you&rsquo;ll be isolated from the public immediately to prevent the spread. The person's medical history is also looked at, with a particular interest in whether the person was in contact with possible infected individuals or animals.</p>

<p>Treatment:</p><p>The Ebola virus does not have a cure or vaccine at this time. Instead, measures are taken to keep the person as comfortable as possible. Treatment is supportive and typically involves rehydration, nutrition, and medications to manage symptoms (pain, fever, vomiting, etc.).the following medical treatments for Ebola-infected patients:</p><ul><li>Providing intravenous fluids (IV) and balancing electrolytes (body salts)</li><li>Maintaining oxygen status and blood pressure</li><li>Treating other infections if they occur</li></ul><h2><strong>Prevention</strong></h2><p>Individuals can take several precautions to protect against Ebola. These steps include:</p><ul><li>avoiding contact with blood and body fluids</li><li>practicing careful hand hygiene, including washing hands with soap and water or an alcohol-based hand sanitizer</li><li>refraining from engaging in burial rituals that involve handling the body of a person who died from Ebola</li><li>refraining from handling items a person with Ebola has handled&nbsp;</li><li>wearing protective gear such as gloves and other personal protective equipment</li><li>regular hand washing</li><li>sanitation and sterilization of the environment and instruments</li><li>identification and isolation of infected individuals from the community</li><li>tracing contacts, including those during the incubation period</li></ul>


--------------------Dengue------------------------

<p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>Dengue is the most common and important arthropod-borne viral (arboviral) illness in humans. It is transmitted by mosquitoes of the genus <em>Aedes</em>, which are widely distributed in subtropical and tropical areas of the world. Millions of cases of dengue infection occur worldwide each year. Dengue fever is most common in Southeast Asia and the western Pacific islands. A virus causes dengue fever, and there is no specific medicine or antibiotic to treat it. For typical dengue fever, the treatment is directed toward relief of the symptoms.&nbsp;</p><p>The virus is not contagious and cannot spread directly from person to person. It is mosquito-borne, so there must be a person-to-mosquito-to-another-person pathway. After being bitten by a mosquito carrying the virus, the incubation period for dengue fever ranges from 3 to 15 (usually 5 to 8) days before the signs and symptoms of dengue appear in stages.</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>Dengue fever is caused by any one of four types of dengue viruses spread by mosquitoes that thrive in and near human lodgings. When a mosquito bites a person infected with a dengue virus, the virus enters the mosquito. When the infected mosquito then bites another person, the virus enters that person's bloodstream. Victims of dengue often have contortions due to the intense pain in the joints, muscles, and bones, hence the name breakbone fever.&nbsp;</p><p>Previous infection with a dengue fever virus increases your risk of having severe symptoms if you're infected again. If severe, dengue fever can damage the lungs, liver or heart. Blood pressure can drop to dangerous levels, causing shock and, in some cases, death.</p>

<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><p>Many people, especially children and teens, may experience no signs or symptoms during a mild case of dengue fever. When symptoms do occur, they usually begin four to seven days after you are bitten by an infected mosquito.&nbsp;</p><ul><li>high fever</li><li>Severe headaches</li><li>Pain behind the eyes</li><li>Severe joint and muscle pain</li><li>Fatigue</li><li>Nausea</li><li>Vomiting</li><li>Skin rash</li><li>Mild bleeding (such a nose bleed, bleeding gums, or easy bruising)</li></ul><p>&nbsp;A life-threatening emergency &mdash; include:</p><ul><li>Severe abdominal pain</li><li>Persistent vomiting</li><li>Bleeding from your gums or nose</li><li>Blood in your urine, stools or vomit</li><li>Bleeding under the skin, which might look like bruising</li><li>Difficult or rapid breathing</li><li>Cold or clammy skin (shock)</li><li>Fatigue</li><li>Irritability or restlessness</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Doctors can diagnose dengue infection with a blood test to check for the virus or antibodies to it. If you become sick after traveling to a tropical area, let your doctor know. This will allow your doctor to evaluate the possibility that your symptoms were caused by a dengue infection.</p>

<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>Dengue is a virus, so there is no specific treatment or cure. However, an intervention can help, depending on how severe the disease is. For milder forms, treatment includes:</p><p><strong>Preventing dehydration:</strong> A high fever and vomiting can dehydrate the body. The person should drink clean water, ideally bottled rather than tap water. Rehydration salts can also help replace fluids and minerals.</p><p><strong>Painkillers, such as Tylenol or paracetamol:</strong> These can help lower fever and ease the pain.</p><p><strong>Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs</strong> (NSAIDs), such as aspirin or ibuprofen, are not advised, as they can increase the risk of internal bleeding.</p><p><strong>Prevention</strong></p><p>The best way to prevent the disease is to prevent bites by infected mosquitoes, particularly if you are living in or traveling to a tropical area. To protect yourself:</p><ul><li>Use mosquito repellents, even indoors.</li><li>When outdoors, wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants tucked into socks.</li><li>When indoors, use air conditioning if available.</li><li>Make sure window and door screens are secure and free of holes. If sleeping areas are not screened or air-conditioned, use mosquito nets.</li><li>If you have symptoms of dengue, speak to your doctor.</li></ul>


-------------------------------------CHICKEN POX-------------------------------------------


<p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>Chickenpox is an infection caused by the varicella-zoster virus. It causes an itchy rash with small, fluid-filled blisters. Chickenpox is very contagious and mainly affects kids, but adults can get it, too. Over the course of several days, the blisters pop and start to leak. Then they crust and scab over before finally healing. It&rsquo;s very rare to have the chickenpox infection more than once. And since the chickenpox vaccine was introduced in the mid-1990s, cases have declined. The infection will have to be in your body for around seven to 21 days before the rash and other symptoms develop.</p><p>&nbsp;You start to be contagious to those around you up to 48 hours before the skin rash starts to occur. The infection will have to be in your body for around seven to 21 days before the rash and other symptoms develop. You start to be contagious to those around you up to 48 hours before the skin rash starts to occur.</p><p><strong>Causes:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Chickenpox is caused by a virus called varicella-zoster. People become infected after being in contact with an infected child or adult.</p><p>Chickenpox is one of the most infectious diseases. People who have never had chickenpox and have never been vaccinated are at the highest risk of infection.</p><h2>Complications</h2><p>Chickenpox is normally a mild disease. But it can be serious and can lead to complications including:</p><ul><li>Bacterial infections of the skin, soft tissues, bones, joints or bloodstream (sepsis)</li><li>Dehydration</li><li>Pneumonia</li><li>Inflammation of the brain (encephalitis)</li><li>Toxic shock syndrome</li><li>Reye's syndrome in children and teenagers who take aspirin during chickenpox</li><li>Death</li></ul>


<p>Symptoms:</p><p>Before the rash appears, there will be:</p><ul><li>a general feeling of being unwell (malaise)</li><li>fever, which is usually worse in adults than in children</li><li>aching muscles</li><li>loss of appetite</li><li>in some cases, a feeling of nausea</li></ul><p>After the rash appears, there will be:</p><ul><li>Rash: Severity varies from a few spots to a rash that covers the whole body.</li><li>Spots: The spots develop in clusters and generally appear on the face, limbs, chest, and stomach. They tend to be small, red, and itchy.</li><li>Blisters: Blisters can develop on the top of the spots. These can become very itchy.</li><li>Clouding: Within about 48 hours, the blisters cloud over and start drying out. A crust develops.</li><li>Healing: Within about 10 days, the crusts fall off on their own.</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnose:</strong></p><p>Doctors generally diagnose chickenpox based on the rash.</p><p>If there's any doubt about the diagnosis, chickenpox can be confirmed with laboratory tests, including blood tests or culture of lesion samples. Tell your doctor right away if you are pregnant and have been exposed to chickenpox.</p>


<p><strong>Treatment:</strong></p><p>Most people diagnosed with chickenpox will be advised to manage their symptoms while they wait for the virus to pass through their system. Parents will be told to keep children out of school and daycare to prevent spread of the virus. Infected adults will also need to stay home. Your doctor may prescribe an antihistamine to relieve itching. But for the most part, the disease is allowed to run its course.&nbsp;</p>
<h2><strong>Prevention</strong></h2><p>A vaccine is available for varicella. For children, 2 doses of the varicella vaccine are given, one at 12 to 15 months and one at age 4 to 6 years. These are 90 percent effective at preventing chickenpox.</p><h2><strong>Chickenpox and pregnancy</strong></h2><p>During pregnancy, there is a slightly higher risk of developing pneumonia with chickenpox. There is also a danger of passing the infection on to the fetus.</p><p>If infection occurs during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy, there is a higher risk of fetal varicella syndrome, which can lead to scarring, eye problems, brain drainage, and shortened arms or legs.</p><p>If the infection happens later in pregnancy, varicella may be transmitted directly to the fetus and the baby can be born with varicella.</p><p>If you become exposed to varicella during pregnancy, whether chickenpox or shingles, it is important to talk to a doctor right away.</p>



---------------------------------MENTAL HEALTH-----------------------------
------------------------CLINICAL DEPRESSION-------------------------------------------

<p><strong>Clinical Depression:</strong></p><p><strong>Summary:</strong></p><p>Depression is a mental disorder characterized by at least two weeks of low mood that is present across most situations. It is often accompanied by low self-esteem, loss of interest in normally enjoyable activities, low energy, and pain without a clear cause. Those affected may also occasionally have false beliefs or see or hear things that others cannot.</p><p>Major depressive disorder can negatively affect a person's personal life, work life, or education as well as sleeping, eating habits, and general health.</p><p>The death of a loved one, loss of a job or the ending of a relationship are difficult experiences for a person to endure. It is normal for feelings of sadness or grief to develop in response to such situations. Those experiencing loss often might describe themselves as being &ldquo;depressed.&rdquo;</p><p>But being sad is not the same as having depression. The grieving process is natural and unique to each individual and shares some of the same features of depression. Both grief and depression may involve intense sadness and withdrawal from usual activities.</p><p>About 2&ndash;8% of adults with major depression die by suicide and about 50% of people who die by suicide had depression or another mood disorder.</p><p><br /><br /></p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>While we don&rsquo;t know exactly what causes depression, a number of things are often linked to its development. Depression usually results from a combination of recent events and other longer-term or personal factors, rather than one immediate issue or event. Research suggests that a combination of psychological, environmental, genetic and biological factors play a role in depression.</p><p><strong>Psychological Factors:</strong> An individual&rsquo;s outlook to life largely depends upon his habitual thoughts.The habitual thoughts, in turn, have their roots in the upbringing or the childhood experiences of the individual. These experiences coupled with the individual&rsquo;s reactions to the experiences mould and create his character.</p><p>For instance, a child exposed to a very severe and abusive childhood may grow up with little or no self-confidence, and low self-esteem. A child who is repeatedly criticised may find his perspective or views of the world coloured by negativity.</p><p>The constant negative thoughts can make an individual act in negative ways, which can create difficult situations in life, causing the individual to suffer emotionally and mentally.</p><p><strong>Environmental Factors:</strong> A number of situations in the immediate environment of a person can affect his/her mental health and emotional well-being. Situations such as:</p><ul><li>financial problems</li><li>job loss</li><li>stress at workplace</li><li>stressful relationships (either with a spouse, parents, and other family members)</li><li>separations/divorce</li><li>death of a loved one</li><li>unemployment</li><li>chronic health conditions or terminal illnesses</li><li>social isolation</li><li>family violence</li><li>low income</li><li>living alone</li></ul><h3><strong>Depression through illness</strong></h3><p>Long-lasting or life-threatening conditions like cancer or coronary heart disease can put you at higher risk of developing depression.</p><p>Many people don't know that head injuries can cause depression, and a severe head injury can lead to emotional problems and mood swings.</p><h3><strong>Usage drugs and alcohol</strong></h3><p>"Drowning your sorrows" is actually a bad idea when it comes to depression. Alcohol is categorised as a "strong depressant" which can make depression worse, and drinking or taking drugs to cope can lead to a downward spiral by having a negative effect on other parts of your life.</p><p>There's evidence that cannabis can cause depression, particularly in teenagers, even if it helps you relax.</p>

<p><strong>Symptoms:</strong></p><ul><li>Fatigue or loss of energy almost every day</li><li>Feelings of worthlessness or guilt almost every day</li><li>Impaired concentration, indecisiveness</li><li>Insomnia or hypersomnia (excessive sleeping) almost every day</li><li>Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in almost all activities nearly every day (called anhedonia, this symptom can be indicated by reports from significant others)</li><li>Restlessness or feeling slowed down</li><li>Recurring thoughts of death or sucidie</li><li>Significant weight loss or gain (a change of more than 5% of body weight in a month)</li></ul><p><strong>Diagnosis:</strong></p><p>To effectively diagnose and treat depression, the doctor must hear about specific symptoms of depression. A doctor may use a series of standard questions to screen for depression. While a physical examination will reveal a patient's overall state of health, by talking with a patient, a doctor can learn about other things that are relevant to making a depression diagnosis. A patient, for example, can report on such things as daily moods, behaviors, and lifestyle habits.</p><p>A depression diagnosis is often difficult to make because clinical depression can manifest in so many different ways. For example, some clinically depressed individuals seem to withdraw into a state of apathy. Others may become irritable or even agitated. Eating and sleeping patterns can be exaggerated. Clinical depression may cause a person either to sleep or eat to excess or almost eliminate those activities.</p><p>Your doctor may determine a diagnosis of depression based on:</p><ul><li><strong>Physical exam.</strong> Your doctor may do a physical exam and ask questions about your health. In some cases, depression may be linked to an underlying physical health problem.</li><li><strong>Lab tests.</strong> For example, your doctor may do a blood test called a complete blood count or test your thyroid to make sure it's functioning properly.</li><li><strong>Psychiatric evaluation.</strong> Your mental health professional asks about your symptoms, thoughts, feelings and behavior patterns. You may be asked to fill out a questionnaire to help answer these questions.</li><li><strong>DSM-5.</strong> Your mental health professional may use the criteria for depression listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association.</li></ul>

<p><strong>General Treatment:</strong></p><p>Medications and psychotherapy are effective for most people with depression. Your primary care doctor or psychiatrist can prescribe medications to relieve symptoms. However, many people with depression also benefit from seeing a psychiatrist, psychologist or other mental health professional.</p><p>If you have severe depression, you may need a hospital stay, or you may need to participate in an outpatient treatment program until your symptoms improve.</p><p><strong>Psychotherapy</strong></p><p>Psychotherapy is a general term for treating depression by talking about your condition and related issues with a mental health professional. Psychotherapy is also known as talk therapy or psychological therapy.</p><p>Psychotherapy can help you:</p><ul><li>Adjust to a crisis or other current difficulty</li><li>Identify negative beliefs and behaviors and replace them with healthy, positive ones</li><li>Explore relationships and experiences, and develop positive interactions with others</li><li>Regain a sense of satisfaction and control in your life and help ease depression symptoms, such as hopelessness and anger.</li></ul><p><strong>Lifestyle changes</strong></p><p><strong>Exercise:</strong> Regular exercise can be as effective at treating depression as medication. Not only does exercise boost serotonin, endorphins, and other feel-good brain chemicals, it triggers the growth of new brain cells and connections, just like antidepressants do. Best of all, you don&rsquo;t have to train for a marathon in order to reap the benefits. Even a half-hour daily walk can make a big difference. For maximum results, aim for 30 to 60 minutes of aerobic activity on most days.</p><p><strong>Social support:</strong> Strong social networks reduce isolation, a key risk factor for depression. Keep in regular contact with friends and family, or consider joining a class or group. Volunteering is a wonderful way to get social support and help others while also helping yourself.</p><p><strong>Nutrition:</strong> Eating well is important for both your physical and mental health. Eating small, well-balanced meals throughout the day will help you keep your energy up and minimize mood swings. While you may be drawn to sugary foods for the quick boost they provide, complex carbohydrates are a better choice. They&rsquo;ll get you going without the all-too-soon sugar crash.</p><p><strong>Sleep:</strong> Sleep has a strong effect on mood. When you don&rsquo;t get enough sleep, your depression symptoms will be worse. Sleep deprivation exacerbates irritability, moodiness, sadness, and fatigue. Make sure you&rsquo;re getting enough sleep each night.&nbsp;</p><p><strong>Stress reduction:</strong> Make changes in your life to help manage and reduce stress. Too much stress exacerbates depression and puts you at risk for future depression. Take the aspects of your life that stress you out, such as work overload or unsupportive relationships, and find ways to minimize their impact.</p><p><em><strong>&ldquo;Depression lies. It tells you you&rsquo;ve always felt this way, and you always will. But you haven&rsquo;t, and you won&rsquo;t.&rdquo; - Halley Cornell</strong></em></p>


------------------ANXITEY DISORDER-----------------------



<p><strong>Overview:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Anxiety is a normal reaction to stress and can be beneficial in some situations. It can alert us to dangers and help us prepare and pay attention. Anxiety disorders differ from normal feelings of nervousness or anxiousness and involve excessive fear or anxiety. Anxiety disorders are the most common of mental disorders and affect nearly 30 percent of adults at some point in their lives. But anxiety disorders are treatable and a number of effective treatments are available. Treatment helps most people lead normal productive lives.</p><p>Occasional anxiety is OK. But anxiety disorders are different. They&rsquo;re a group of mental illnesses that cause constant and overwhelming anxiety and fear. Excessive anxiety can make you avoid work, school, family get-togethers, and other social situations that might trigger or worsen your symptoms.&nbsp;</p><p>There are several types of anxiety disorders:</p><p><strong>Generalized anxiety disorder</strong>. You feel excessive, unrealistic worry and tension with little or no reason.</p><p><strong>Panic disorder.</strong> You feel sudden, intense fear that brings on a panic attack. During a panic attack, you may break out in a sweat, have chest pain, and have a pounding heartbeat (palpitations). Sometimes you may feel like you&rsquo;re choking or having a heart attack.</p><p><strong>Social anxiety disorder</strong>. Also called social phobia, this is when you feel overwhelming worry and self-consciousness about everyday social situations. You obsessively worry about others judging you or being embarrassed or ridiculed.</p><p><strong>Medication-induced anxiety disorder.</strong>&nbsp;The use of certain medications or illegal drugs, or withdrawal from certain drugs, can trigger some symptoms of anxiety disorder.</p>

<p><strong>Symptoms/Causes:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>These common external factors can cause anxiety:</p><ul><li>Stress at work</li><li>Stress from school</li><li>Stress in a personal relationship such as marriage</li><li>Financial stress</li><li>Stress from an emotional trauma such as the death of a loved one</li><li>Stress from a serious medical illness</li><li>The side effect of medication</li><li>Use of an illicit drug, such as cocaine</li><li>A symptom of medical illness (such as heart attack, heat stroke, hypoglycemia)</li><li>Lack of oxygen in circumstances as diverse as high altitude sickness, emphysema, or pulmonary embolism (a blood clot in the vessels of the lung)</li></ul><p><strong>People may experience:</strong></p><ul><li>Behavioral: hypervigilance, irritability, or restlessness</li><li>Cognitive: lack of concentration, racing thoughts, or unwanted thoughts</li><li>Whole-body: fatigue or sweating</li><li>Also common: anxiety, excessive worry, fear, feeling of impending doom, insomnia, nausea, palpitations, or trembling</li></ul>


<p><strong>Treatment:&nbsp;</strong></p><ul><li><h3><strong><strong>Psychotherapy:</strong></strong></h3></li></ul><p>Also known as talk therapy or psychological counseling, psychotherapy involves working with a therapist to reduce your anxiety symptoms. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is the most effective form of psychotherapy for generalized anxiety disorder.</p><p>Generally a short-term treatment, cognitive behavioral therapy focuses on teaching you specific skills to directly manage your worries and help you gradually return to the activities you've avoided because of anxiety. Through this process, your symptoms improve as you build on your initial success.</p><ol><li><h3><strong>Medications</strong></h3></li></ol><p><strong>Antidepressants.</strong> Antidepressants, including medications in the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) classes, are the first-line medication treatments. Your doctor also may recommend other antidepressants.</p><p><strong>Buspirone.</strong> An anti-anxiety medication called buspirone may be used on an ongoing basis. As with most antidepressants, it typically takes up to several weeks to become fully effective.</p><p><strong>Benzodiazepines.</strong> In limited circumstances, your doctor may prescribe a benzodiazepine for the relief of anxiety symptoms. These sedatives are generally used only for relieving acute anxiety on a short-term basis. Because they can be habit-forming, these medications aren't a good choice if you have or had problems with alcohol or drug abuse.</p><ul><li><h2><strong><strong>Lifestyle and home remedies</strong></strong></h2></li></ul><p>While most people with anxiety disorders need psychotherapy or medications to get anxiety under control, lifestyle changes also can make a difference. Here's what you can do:</p><ul><li><strong>Keep physically active.</strong> Develop a routine so that you're physically active most days of the week. Exercise is a powerful stress reducer. It may improve your mood and help you stay healthy. Start out slowly and gradually increase the amount and intensity of your activities.</li><li><strong>Make sleep a priority.</strong> Do what you can to make sure you're getting enough sleep to feel rested. If you aren't sleeping well, see your doctor.</li><li><strong>Use relaxation techniques.</strong> Visualization techniques, meditation and yoga are examples of relaxation techniques that can ease anxiety.</li><li><strong>Eat healthy.</strong> Healthy eating &mdash; such as focusing on vegetables, fruits, whole grains and fish &mdash; may be linked to reduced anxiety, but more research is needed.</li><li><strong>Avoid alcohol and recreational drugs.</strong> These substances can worsen anxiety.</li><li><strong>Quit smoking and cut back or quit drinking coffee.</strong> Both nicotine and caffeine can worsen anxiety.</li></ul>



-----------------Bipolar Disorder---------------------------


<p><strong>Overview :&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Bipolar disorder is a mental illness marked by extreme changes in mood from high to low, and from low to high. Highs are periods of mania, while lows are periods of depression. The changes in mood may even become mixed, so you might feel elated and depressed at the same time.</p><p>When you become depressed, you may feel sad or hopeless and lose interest or pleasure in most activities. When your mood shifts to mania or hypomania (less extreme than mania), you may feel euphoric, full of energy or unusually irritable. These mood swings can affect sleep, energy, activity, judgment, behavior and the ability to think clearly.</p><p><strong>Causes:</strong></p><p>Bipolar disorder does not appear to have a single cause but is more likely to result from a range of factors that interact.</p><ul><li>Genetic factors</li><li>Biological traits</li><li>Brain-chemical imbalances: Neurotransmitter imbalances appear to play a key role in many mood disorders, including bipolar disorder.</li><li>Hormonal problems: Hormonal imbalances might trigger or cause bipolar disorder.</li><li>Environmental factors: Abuse, mental stress, a &ldquo;significant loss,&rdquo; or some other traumatic event may contribute to or trigger bipolar disorder.</li><li>One possibility is that some people with a genetic predisposition for bipolar disorder may not have noticeable symptoms until an environmental factor triggers a severe mood shift.</li></ul>

<p><strong>Symptoms:&nbsp;</strong></p><p>Symptoms vary between people, and according to mood. Some people have clear mood shifts, with symptoms of mania and then of depression each lasting for several months, or with months of stability between them. Some spend months or years in a &ldquo;high&rdquo; or &ldquo;low&rdquo; mood.</p><p>A &ldquo;mixed state&rdquo; is when a manic and a depressive episode happen at the same time. The person may feel negative, as with depression, but they may also feel &ldquo;wired&rdquo; and restless.</p><p>Mania or hypomania</p><p>Hypomania and mania refer to a &ldquo;high&rdquo; mood. Mania is the more severe form.</p><p>Symptoms can include:</p><ul><li>impaired judgment</li><li>a sense of distraction or boredom</li><li>missing work or school, or underperforming</li><li>thinking they can &ldquo;do anything&rdquo;</li><li>belief that nothing is wrong</li><li>being extremely forthcoming, sometimes aggressively so</li><li>likelihood of engaging in risky behavior</li><li>a sense of being on top of the world, exhilarated, or euphoric</li><li>excessive self-confidence, an inflated sense of self-esteem and self-importance</li><li>excessive and rapid talking, pressurized speech that may jump from one topic to another</li><li>&ldquo;racing&rdquo; thoughts that come and go quickly, and bizarre ideas that the person may act upon</li><li>This may include squandering money, abusing illegal drugs or alcohol, and taking part in dangerous activities. A higher libido may lead to promiscuity.</li><li>Depressive symptoms</li><li>During a depressive episode, the person may experience:</li><li>a feeling of gloom, blackness, despair, and hopelessness</li><li>extreme sadness</li><li>insomnia and sleeping problems</li><li>anxiety about trivial things</li><li>pain or physical problems that do not respond to treatment</li><li>guilt, and a feeling that everything that goes wrong or appears to be wrong is their fault</li><li>changes in eating patterns, whether eating more or eating less</li><li>weight loss or weight gain</li><li>extreme tiredness, fatigue, and listlessness</li><li>an inability to enjoy activities or interests that usually give pleasure</li><li>low attention span and difficulty remembering</li><li>irritation, possibly triggered by noises, smells, tight clothing, and other things that would usually be tolerated or ignored</li><li>an inability to face going to work or school, possibly leading to underperformance</li></ul>

<h2><strong>Treatment and medications to reduce bipolar disorder</strong></h2><p>To date, there is no cure for bipolar disorder. But proper treatment helps most people with bipolar disorder gain better control of their mood swings and related symptoms. This is also true for people with the most severe forms of the illness.</p><p>Because it is a lifelong and recurrent illness, people with the disorder need long-term treatment to maintain control of bipolar symptoms. An effective maintenance treatment plan includes medication and psychotherapy for preventing relapse and reducing symptom severity.</p><h3><strong>Medications</strong></h3><ol><li>Mood stabilizing medications</li></ol><p>These medications are commonly used as mood stabilizers in bipolar disorder:</p><ul><li>Lithium (sometimes known as Eskalith or Lithobid) was the first medication approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the 1970s.</li><li>Valproic acid or divalproex sodium (Depakote), approved by the FDA in 1995.</li><li>Anticonvulsant lamotrigine (Lamictal).</li><li>Other anticonvulsant medications, including gabapentin (Neurontin), topiramate (Topamax), and oxcarbazepine (Trileptal)</li></ul><ol start="2"><li>Atypical antipsychotic medications</li></ol><ul><li>Olanzapine (Zyprexa)</li><li>Aripiprazole (Abilify)</li><li>Quetiapine (Seroquel)</li><li>Risperidone (Risperdal) and ziprasidone (Geodon)</li></ul><ol><li>Antidepressant medications</li></ol><ul><li>Fluoxetine (Prozac)</li><li>Paroxetine (Paxil)</li><li>Sertraline (Zoloft)</li><li>Bupropion (Wellbutrin)</li></ul><h3>Psychotherapy</h3><p>In addition to medication, psychotherapy, or &ldquo;talk&rdquo; therapy, can be an effective treatment.</p><ol><li><em>Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)</em> helps people with bipolar disorder learn to change harmful or negative thought patterns and behaviors.</li><li><em>Family-focused therapy</em> includes family members. It helps enhance family coping strategies, such as recognizing new episodes early and helping their loved ones. This therapy also improves communication and problem-solving.</li><li><em>Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy </em>helps people with bipolar disorder improve their relationships with others and manage their daily routines. Regular daily routines and sleep schedules may help protect against manic episodes.</li><li><em>Psychoeducation </em>teaches people with bipolar disorder about the illness and its treatment. This treatment helps people recognize signs of relapse so they can seek treatment early before a full-blown episode occurs. Usually done in a group, psychoeducation may also be helpful for family members and caregivers.</li></ol><h3>Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)</h3><ul><li>For cases in which medication and/or psychotherapy does not work, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be useful. ECT, formerly known as &ldquo;shock therapy,&rdquo; once had a bad reputation.</li></ul><h3>Sleep Medications</h3><ul><li>People with bipolar disorder who have trouble sleeping usually sleep better after getting treatment for bipolar disorder. However, if sleeplessness does not improve, the doctor may suggest a change in medications.</li><li>If the problems still continue, the doctor may prescribe sedatives or other sleep medications.</li></ul><h2>Management of Bipolar disorder</h2><ul><li>Be aware of manic or hypomanic episode symptoms so if they do occur, you can seek immediate help and treatment for them. The same is true for depressive symptoms &mdash; the sooner they are caught, the sooner they can be treated.</li><li>The best prevention strategy is for people who have already experienced an episode of mania or depression to stay on medication to avoid recurrence.</li><li>People who have family members with the condition should be alert to the possibility that they could develop the disorder. In short, if you&rsquo;re afraid that you may get bipolar disorder or are at greater risk for it in the future, you should monitor yourself for symptoms of mania or depression.</li></ul>



-----------------PTSD-----------------------------

<h2>Overview</h2><p>Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), once called shell shock or battle fatigue syndrome is a serious condition that can develop after a person has experienced or witnessed a traumatic or terrifying event in which serious physical harm occurred or was threatened. PTSD is a lasting consequence of traumatic ordeals that cause intense fear, helplessness, or horrors, such as a sexual or physical assault, the unexpected death of a loved one, an accident, war, or natural disaster. Families of victims can also develop PTSD, as can emergency personnel and rescue workers.</p><p>Most people who experience a traumatic event will have reactions that may include shock, anger, nervousness, fear, and even guilt. These reactions are common, and for most people, they go away over time. For a person with PTSD, however, these feelings continue and even increase, becoming so strong that they keep the person from living a normal life. People with PTSD have symptoms for longer than one month and cannot function as well as before the event occurred.</p><h2><strong>Are there different types of PTSD?</strong></h2><p>If you are given a diagnosis of PTSD, you might be told that you have mild, moderate or severe PTSD. This explains what sort of impact your symptoms are having on you currently &ndash; it&rsquo;s not a description of how frightening or upsetting your experiences might have been.</p><p>PTSD may be described differently in some situations:</p><ul><li><strong>Delayed-onset PTSD</strong>&nbsp;&ndash; if your symptoms emerge more than six months after experiencing trauma, this might be described as &lsquo;delayed PTSD&rsquo; or &lsquo;delayed-onset PTSD&rsquo;.</li><li><strong>Complex PTSD</strong>&nbsp;&ndash; if you experienced trauma at an early age or it lasted for a long time, you might be given a diagnosis of &lsquo;complex PTSD&rsquo;. (See our page on complex PTSD for more information.)</li><li><strong>Birth trauma</strong>&nbsp;&ndash; PTSD that develops after a traumatic experience of childbirth is also known as &lsquo;birth trauma&rsquo;. (See our page on PTSD and birth trauma for more information.)</li></ul><p>If you experience some PTSD symptoms while supporting someone close to you who&rsquo;s experienced trauma, this is sometimes known as &lsquo;secondary trauma&rsquo;.</p><h2><strong>Causes of PTSD</strong></h2><p>Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can develop after a very stressful, frightening or distressing event, or after a prolonged traumatic experience.</p><p>Types of events that can lead to PTSD include:</p><ul><li>Serious accidents</li><li>Physical or sexual assault</li><li>Abuse, including childhood or domestic abuse</li><li>Exposure to traumatic events at work, including remote exposure</li><li>Serious health problems, such as being admitted to intensive care</li><li>Childbirth experiences, such as losing a baby</li><li>War and conflict</li><li>Torture</li></ul>

<h2><strong>Signs and Symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder</strong></h2><p>Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD.</p><p>Symptoms of PTSD fall into four categories. Specific symptoms can vary in severity.</p><ul><li>Intrusive thoughts such as repeated, involuntary memories; distressing dreams; or flashbacks of the traumatic event. Flashbacks may be so vivid that people feel they are re-living the traumatic experience or seeing it before their eyes.</li><li>Avoiding reminders of the traumatic event may include avoiding people, places, activities, objects and situations that bring on distressing memories. People may try to avoid remembering or thinking about the traumatic event. They may resist talking about what happened or how they feel about it.</li><li>Negative thoughts and feelings may include ongoing and distorted beliefs about oneself or others (e.g., &ldquo;I am bad,&rdquo; &ldquo;No one can be trusted&rdquo;); ongoing fear, horror, anger, guilt or shame; much less interest in activities previously enjoyed; or feeling detached or estranged from others.</li><li>Arousal and reactive symptoms may include being irritable and having angry outbursts; behaving recklessly or in a self-destructive way; being easily startled, or having problems concentrating or sleeping.</li></ul><p>Many people who are exposed to a traumatic event experience symptoms like those described above in the days following the event.</p><h2><strong>Complications of post-traumatic stress disorder</strong></h2><p>PTSD can lead to some complications.</p><p>These include:</p><ul><li>Difficulty with work or relationships</li><li>A higher risk of heart problems</li><li>A greater chance of chronic disease</li><li>A possibility of changes that affect the brain, including higher levels of the stress hormone cortisol and a decrease in the size of the hippocampus &ndash; a brain structure important in-memory processing and emotion</li></ul><p>People with PTSD may have other health problems, such as depression, anxiety, personality disorder, or the misuse of substances such as alcohol or drugs.</p><h2><strong>Diagnosis and examinations</strong></h2><p>To diagnose post-traumatic stress disorder, your doctor will likely:</p><ul><li>Perform a physical exam to check for medical problems that may be causing your symptoms</li><li>Do a psychological evaluation that includes a discussion of your signs and symptoms and the event or events that led up to them</li><li>Use the criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association</li></ul><p>Diagnosis of PTSD requires exposure to an event that involved the actual or possible threat of death, violence or serious injury. Your exposure can happen in one or more of these ways:</p><ul><li>You directly experienced the traumatic event</li><li>You witnessed, in person, the traumatic event occurring to others</li><li>You learned someone close to you experienced or was threatened by the traumatic event</li><li>You are repeatedly exposed to graphic details of traumatic events (for example, if you are a first responder to the scene of traumatic events)</li><li>You may have PTSD if the problems you experience after this exposure continue for more than a month and cause significant problems in your ability to function in social and work settings and negatively impact relationships.</li></ul>


<h2><strong>Treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder</strong></h2><p>Treatment usually involves psychotherapy and counseling, medication, or a combination.</p><p>Options for psychotherapy will be specially tailored for managing trauma.</p><p>They include:</p><ul><li><strong>Cognitive processing therapy (CPT):</strong>&nbsp;Also known as cognitive restructuring, the individual learns how to think about things in a new way. Mental imagery of the traumatic event may help them work through the trauma, to gain control of the fear and distress.</li><li><strong>Exposure therapy:</strong>&nbsp;Talking repeatedly about the event or confronting the cause of the fear in a safe and controlled environment may help the person feel they have more control over their thoughts and feelings. The effectiveness of this treatment has been questioned, however, and it must be carried out with care, or there may be a risk of worsening of the symptoms.</li></ul><h3><strong>Medications</strong></h3><p>Some medications can be used to treat the symptoms of PTSD.</p><p>Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as paroxetine, are commonly used. SSRIs also help treat depression, anxiety and sleep problems, symptoms that are often linked to PTSD. There have been some reports that antidepressant medications can cause an increased risk of suicide in individuals under the age of 24.</p><p>Sometimes, benzodiazepines may be used to treat irritability, insomnia, and anxiety. However, the National Center for PTSD does not recommend these, because they do not treat the core symptoms and they can lead to dependency.</p><h3><strong>Experimental therapies</strong></h3><p>Research has suggested that the following therapies may help, but further evidence is needed to confirm their safety and effectiveness.</p><p><strong>Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR):</strong>&nbsp;Recalling the event while making a specific kind of side-to-side eye movement may help lower distress levels for people with PTSD. This allows the individual to have more positive emotions, behaviors, and thoughts.</p><p><strong>MDMA:</strong>&nbsp;The pharmaceutical version of the recreational drug, ecstasy, may help people learn to deal with their memories more effectively by encouraging a feeling of safety. Scientists are currently researching this option.</p><p><strong>Cortisone hormone therapy:</strong>&nbsp;One study has suggested that high-dose cortisol-based treatments could help reduce the risk of PTSD if given soon after a trauma occurs.</p><p><strong>Computer games:</strong>&nbsp;Playing some computer games have been linked with fewer symptoms in some veterans with PTSD, according to a study published in 2017. However, the researchers do not recommend using computer games instead of regular therapy.</p><h3><strong>Self-help tips</strong></h3><p>Active coping is a key part of recovery. It enables a person to accept the impact of the event they have experienced, and take action to improve their situation.</p><p>The following can help achieve this:</p><p>Learning about PTSD and understanding that an ongoing response is normal and that recovery takes time</p><p>Accepting that healing does not necessarily mean forgetting, but gradually feeling less bothered by the symptoms and having confidence in the ability to cope with the bad memories</p><p>Other things that can help include:</p><ul><li>Finding someone to confide in</li><li>Spending time with other people who know what has happened</li><li>Letting people know what might trigger symptoms</li><li>Breaking down tasks into smaller parts, to make them easier to prioritize and complete</li><li>Doing some physical exercise, such as swimming, walking, or yoga</li><li>Practicing relaxation, breathing, or meditation techniques</li><li>Listening to quiet music or spending time in nature</li><li>Understanding that it will take time for symptoms to go away</li><li>Accepting that PTSD is not a sign of weakness but can happen to anyone</li><li>Participating in enjoyable activities that can provide a distraction</li></ul><p>A number of helplines and other facilities are available for people who are or who may be experiencing the symptoms of PTSD.</p><h2><strong>Prevention</strong></h2><p>After surviving a traumatic event, many people have PTSD-like symptoms at first, such as being unable to stop thinking about what&rsquo;s happened. Fear, anxiety, anger, depression, guilt &ndash; all are common reactions to trauma. However, the majority of people exposed to trauma do not develop long-term post-traumatic stress disorder.</p><p>Getting timely help and support may prevent normal stress reactions from getting worse and developing into PTSD. This may mean turning to family and friends who will listen and offer comfort. It may mean seeking out a mental health professional for a brief course of therapy. Some people may also find it helpful to turn to their faith community.</p><p>Support from others also may help prevent you from turning to unhealthy coping methods, such as misuse of alcohol or drugs.</p>


-----------------------Schizophrenia-------------------

<p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>Schizophrenia is a serious disorder that affects how a person thinks, feels, and acts. Someone with schizophrenia may have difficulty distinguishing between what is real and what is imaginary; may be unresponsive or withdrawn, and may have difficulty expressing normal emotions in social situations.</p><h2><strong>Types of Schizophrenia<br /></strong></h2><p><strong>Paranoid type schizophrenia: </strong>Typically consists of false beliefs and hearing things that aren&rsquo;t there; maybe more manageable than other types of schizophrenia (more on paranoid schizophrenia)</p><p><strong>Disorganized type schizophrenia:&nbsp;</strong>Typically consists of thoughts, speech, and behavior that is inappropriate and incomprehensible</p><p><strong>Catatonic type schizophrenia:&nbsp;</strong>Consists of activity levels on either end of the spectrum; either a dazed, coma-like state or a hyperactive state</p><p><strong>Undifferentiated type schizophrenia: </strong>A form of schizophrenia that does not match any of the above types; sometimes this is called schizophrenia not otherwise specified</p><p><strong>Residual type schizophrenia:&nbsp;</strong>Consists of some schizophrenic symptoms of lesser severity</p><h2><strong>Risk factors</strong></h2><p>Although the precise cause of schizophrenia isn&rsquo;t known, certain factors seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering schizophrenia, including:</p><ul><li>Having a family history of schizophrenia</li><li>Increased immune system activation, such as from inflammation or autoimmune diseases</li><li>Older age of the father</li><li>Some pregnancy and birth complications, such as malnutrition or exposure to toxins or viruses that may impact brain development</li><li>Taking mind-altering (psychoactive or psychotropic) drugs during teen years and young adulthood</li></ul><h2><strong>Causes of Schizophrenia<br /></strong></h2><p>The cause of schizophrenia is still unclear. Some theories about the cause of this disease include genetics (heredity), biology (abnormalities in the brain&rsquo;s chemistry or structure); and/or possible viral infections and immune disorders.</p><p><strong>Genetics (Heredity)</strong></p><p>Scientists recognize that the disorder tends to run in families and that a person inherits a tendency to develop the disease. Similar to some other genetically-related illnesses, schizophrenia may appear when the body undergoes hormonal and physical changes (like those that occur during puberty in the teen and young adult years) or after dealing with highly stressful situations.</p><p><strong>Biology</strong></p><p>Chemistry &ndash; Scientists believe that people with schizophrenia have an imbalance of the brain chemicals or neurotransmitters: dopamine, glutamate, and serotonin. These neurotransmitters allow nerve cells in the brain to send messages to each other. The imbalance of these chemicals affects the way a person&rsquo;s brain reacts to stimuli&ndash;which explains why a person with schizophrenia may be overwhelmed by sensory information (loud music or bright lights) which other people can easily handle. This problem in processing different sounds, sights, smells and tastes can also lead to hallucinations or delusions.</p><p><strong>Structure</strong></p><p>Some research suggests that problems with the development of connections and pathways in the brain while in the womb may later lead to schizophrenia.</p><p><strong>Viral Infections and Immune Disorders</strong></p><p>Schizophrenia may also be triggered by environmental events, such as viral infections or immune disorders. For instance, babies whose mothers get the flu while they are pregnant are at higher risk of developing schizophrenia later in life. People who are hospitalized for severe infections are also at higher risk.</p>

<h2><strong>Symptoms</strong></h2><p>A medical or mental health professional may use the following terms when discussing the symptoms of schizophrenia.</p><p><strong>Positive symptoms</strong>&nbsp;are disturbances that are &ldquo;added&rdquo; to the person&rsquo;s personality.</p><p><strong>Delusions:&nbsp;</strong>False ideas- individuals may believe that someone is spying on him or her, or that they are someone famous (or a religious figure).</p><p><strong>Hallucinations:&nbsp;</strong>Seeing, feeling, tasting, hearing or smelling something that doesn&rsquo;t really exist. The most common experience is hearing imaginary voices that give commands or comments to the individual.</p><p><strong>Disordered thinking and speech:&nbsp;</strong>Moving from one topic to another, in a nonsensical fashion. Individuals may also make up their own words or sounds, rhyme in a way that doesn&rsquo;t make sense or repeat words and ideas.</p><p><strong>Disorganized behaviour</strong>: This can range from having problems with routine behaviors like hygiene or choosing appropriate clothing for the weather, to unprovoked outbursts, to impulsive and uninhibited actions. A person may also have movements that seem anxious, agitated, tense, or constant without any apparent reason.</p><p><strong>Negative symptoms</strong>&nbsp;are capabilities that are &ldquo;lost&rdquo; from the person&rsquo;s personality.</p><ul><li>Social withdrawal</li><li>Extreme apathy (lack of interest or enthusiasm)</li><li>Lack of drive or initiative</li><li>Emotional flatness</li></ul><h2><strong>Complications of Schizophrenia<br /></strong></h2><p>Left untreated, schizophrenia can result in severe problems that affect every area of life. Complications that schizophrenia may cause or be associated with include:</p><ul><li>Suicide, suicide attempts and thoughts of suicide</li><li>Self-injury</li><li>Anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)</li><li>Depression</li><li>Abuse of alcohol or other drugs, including tobacco</li><li>Inability to work or attend school</li><li>Legal and financial problems and homelessness</li><li>Social isolation</li><li>Health and medical problems</li><li>Being victimized</li><li>Aggressive behavior, although it&rsquo;s uncommon</li></ul><h2><strong>Diagnosis and test</strong></h2><p>Diagnosis of schizophrenia involves ruling out other mental health disorders and determining that symptoms are not due to substance abuse, medication or a medical condition. Determining a diagnosis of schizophrenia may include:</p><p><strong>Physical exam:&nbsp;</strong>This may be done to help rule out other problems that could be causing symptoms and to check for any related complications.</p><p><strong>Tests and screenings:</strong>&nbsp;These may include tests that help rule out conditions with similar symptoms, and screening for alcohol and drugs. The doctor may also request imaging studies, such as an MRI or CT scan.</p><p><strong>Psychiatric evaluation:</strong>&nbsp;A doctor or mental health professional checks mental status by observing appearance and demeanour and asking about thoughts, moods, delusions, hallucinations, substance use, and potential for violence or suicide. This also includes a discussion of family and personal history.</p><p><strong>Diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia:</strong>&nbsp;A doctor or mental health professional may use the criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association.</p>


<h2><strong>Treatment and medications</strong></h2><h3><strong>Medications</strong></h3><ul><li>Your doctor may offer you medication known as an &lsquo;antipsychotic&rsquo;. These reduce the symptoms of schizophrenia but do not cure the illness. Your healthcare professionals should work with you to help choose a medication. If you want, your carer can also help you make the decision. Doctors should explain the benefits and side effects of each drug.</li><li>In the past, antipsychotics had negative side effects. Some people find that the side effects of newer antipsychotic drugs are easier to manage.</li><li>If you have been on an antipsychotic for a few weeks and the side effects are too difficult to cope with, you should ask your doctor about trying a different one. NICE state that people who have not responded to at least 2 other antipsychotic drugs should be offered clozapine.</li><li>Your medication should be reviewed at least once a year.</li></ul><h3><strong>Psychosocial treatments</strong></h3><p>Your doctor should offer you psychosocial treatments. These treatments help you to look at how your thoughts and behaviour are influenced by the people and society you live in. This can include the following:</p><p><strong>Talking treatments: </strong>NICE says the NHS should offer cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) to all adults with psychosis or schizophrenia. CBT can help you to manage your feelings and symptoms better. CBT does not get rid of your symptoms.</p><p><strong>Psycho-education:&nbsp;</strong>This involves learning about your illness, your treatment, and how to spot early signs of becoming unwell again. It can prevent you from having a full-blown episode. Psycho-education may also be helpful for anyone who is supporting you, such as family, a partner, or a trusted colleague.</p><p><strong>Arts therapies:&nbsp;</strong>This can help to reduce the negative symptoms of the illness. It can help you to express yourself more creatively.</p><p><strong>Family therapy:&nbsp;</strong>NICE recommends family members of people with psychosis and schizophrenia should be offered family therapy. This can help to improve how you feel about family relationships. This can help reduce any problems in the family caused by your symptoms.</p><h2><strong>Prevention of Schizophrenia<br /></strong></h2><ul><li>Similarly to the screening for schizophrenia, prevention of the disease poses a challenge because we are not able to accurately determine which individuals are most likely to be affected.</li><li>Substance abuse is strongly linked to schizophrenia with regular drug users more likely to suffer from the condition and a high percentage of schizophrenic patients have a history of drug abuse. For this reason, the avoidance of drugs such as cannabis, cocaine and amphetamines is recommended in the prevention of schizophrenia.</li><li>Social support is also very important for individuals to manage stressful life events and prevent triggers for the initiation of schizophrenia from occurring. Where possible, people at risk should have a network they can trust to talk through any issues with and avoid isolation.</li></ul>


--------------------------DEMENTIA-----------------

<p><strong>Overview:</strong></p><p>Dementia is a general term for loss of memory, language, problem-solving, and other thinking abilities that are severe enough to interfere with daily life. Alzheimer's is the most common cause of dementia.<strong><br /></strong></p><h2>Causes</h2><p>Dementia is caused by damage to brain cells. This damage interferes with the ability of brain cells to communicate with each other. When brain cells cannot communicate normally, thinking, behavior, and feelings can be affected.</p><p>The brain has many distinct regions, each of which is responsible for different functions (for example, memory, judgment, and movement). When cells in a particular region are damaged, that region cannot carry out its functions normally.</p><p>Different types of dementia are associated with particular types of brain cell damage in particular regions of the brain. For example, in Alzheimer's disease, high levels of certain proteins inside and outside brain cells make it hard for brain cells to stay healthy and to communicate with each other. The brain region called the hippocampus is the center of learning and memory in the brain, and the brain cells in this region are often the first to be damaged. That's why memory loss is often one of the earliest symptoms of Alzheimer's.</p><p>While most changes in the brain that cause dementia are permanent and worsen over time, thinking and memory problems caused by the following conditions may improve when the condition is treated or addressed:</p><ul><li>Depression.</li><li>Medication side effects.</li><li>Excess use of alcohol.</li><li>Thyroid problems.</li><li>Vitamin deficiencies.</li></ul>

<h2>Symptoms of dementia</h2><p>Signs of dementia can vary greatly. Examples include:</p><ul><li>Problems with short-term memory.</li><li>Keeping track of a purse or wallet.</li><li>Paying bills.</li><li>Planning and preparing meals.</li><li>Remembering appointments.</li><li>Traveling out of the neighborhood.</li></ul><h2>Diagnosis of dementia</h2><p>There is no one test to determine if someone has dementia. Doctors diagnose Alzheimer's and other types of dementia based on a careful medical history, a physical examination, laboratory tests, and the characteristic changes in thinking, day-to-day function, and behavior associated with each type. Doctors can determine that a person has dementia with a high level of certainty. But it's harder to determine the exact type of dementia because the symptoms and brain changes of different dementias can overlap. In some cases, a doctor may diagnose "dementia" and not specify a type. If this occurs it may be necessary to see a specialist such as a neurologist or gero-psychologist.</p>

<h2>Dementia treatment and care</h2><p>Treatment of dementia depends on its cause. In the case of most progressive dementias, including Alzheimer's disease, there is no cure and no treatment that slows or stops its progression. But there are drug treatments that may temporarily improve symptoms. The same&nbsp;medications used to treat Alzheimer'sare among the drugs sometimes prescribed to help with symptoms of&nbsp;other types of dementias.&nbsp;Non-drug therapies can also alleviate some symptoms of dementia.</p><p>Ultimately, the path to effective new treatments for dementia is through increased research funding and increased participation in clinical studies. Right now, volunteers are urgently needed to participate in&nbsp;clinical studies and trials about&nbsp;Alzheimer's and other dementias.</p><p><strong>Dementia risk and prevention</strong></p><div><div><h4>Sprint for Discovery</h4></div></div><p>Some&nbsp;risk factors&nbsp;for dementia, such as age and&nbsp;genetics,&nbsp;cannot be changed. But researchers continue to explore the impact of other risk factors on brain health and prevention of dementia.<br /><br />The research reported&nbsp;at the 2019 Alzheimer&rsquo;s Association International Conference&reg; suggests that adopting multiple healthy lifestyle choices, including a healthy diet, not smoking, regular exercise, and cognitive stimulation may decrease the risk of cognitive decline and dementia.</p>

